---
title:  "Get That Big N Job"
date:   2019-11-14 20:00:00 -0700
---

So you want a job. Not just any job though. A job at a place like
Google, Facebook, Amazon, Microsoft, etc. In programmer parlance,
these are called "Big N" companies. As in, the Big 5, Big 10, Big "N"
companies in the tech world.

With these companies, I'd also include some of the newer, larger
startups, especially "unicorn" startups, or startups valued at over a
billion dollars. Places like Stripe, Lyft, AirBnb, Uber, Palantir,
Coinbase, GitHub, Reddit, etc. are all excellent places to intern and
highly selective. Sometimes they pay even better than regular big tech
companies.

There's also some tech finance companies that are very famous such as
Jane Street, Two Sigma, Akuna, etc. They pay **obscene** amounts. Like
in the 10-14k per month range. But their hours are often accordingly
tough and their application process exceedingly selective.

Another common grouping is FAANG, or Facebook, Amazon, Apple, Netflix
and Google. This is kinda flawed for a few reasons. For one, Apple
hires a lot more electrical engineers than programmers, and Netflix
doesn't even hire interns.

But anyways, you want one of these jobs. Whether it's for prestige,
money, or the awesome people, you want this job. How do you get it?

# Reality of Rejection

Be prepared for a lot of rejection. Doesn't matter who you are, or
what you've done, you'll get rejected from *somewhere*. Sometimes your
application gets ghosted. Sometimes you finish an interview and get
rejected for no apparent reason. Don't take it personally, even though
it totally sucks.

Therefore, you should apply to a whole bunch of Big N companies. Don't
just apply to Google and call it a day. If you don't want to work at a
specific Big N company, for whatever reasons, don't apply there. But
if you want a Big N job, apply to as many as you can.

# Roles

There's basically three main divisons for interns at tech
companies. There's software engineering (SWE), product management
(PM), and early-career roles.

Software engineering roles are pretty self explanatory. Yer a
programmer Harry.

Product roles are not as technical but more about digging into
requirements for a project, comparing them with the programmers'
responses, then doing stuff like creating estimates, managing
features, and so on.

The early career roles are interesting cases. These are the
programs like Google STEP, Microsoft Explore, Facebook University and
so on. They're aimed at freshmen and sophomores with some, but not a
lot of experience in programming. In these programs, students receive
more guidance and may alternate between product management and
software engineering roles.

# Timeline

Apply early. Big N companies start their process super super early. I
mean, almost a full year before the term in which you're
interning. Start applying for Summer 2021 positions in
July/August 2020. Monitor the sites and figure out when the
applications open. Sometimes this is really hard to figure out, as
companies' job portals are seemingly designed to be as confusing as
possible. Guess they have to weed out the people who can't navigate
terrible websites.

The reason you should apply early, beyond the possibility that all the
spots fill up, has to due with the way big companies recruit. There's
two parts of the recruitment process: hiring and team placement. In
some companies, such as Google, the team placement is done alongside
hiring. In others, companies recruit for a divison, then place interns
in specific teams later. Either way, the teams/divisions that are more
desirable tend to fill up early, whether due to returning interns
requesting that team, or specific requests by applicants. While any
division/team in a big company is still a great pull, a really well
placed team does come with more cachet and potentially more
interesting work.

# Application Process

The process usually starts with a screen. This can either be a coding
challenge via something like HackerRank, or an actual phone screen
with a person. Even getting a screen is a good sign. It means someone
or some system read through your resume and decided to put you into
the pipeline. The screen isn't meant to be very hard, just a quick
test to make sure you can actually code.

If the screen goes well, you may have either another phone interview
or an on campus interview. On campus interviews are great because
they're in person, but on your home turf.

After that, at some places, e.g. Google, you end up doing more phone
interviews to place you in a specific team. In others, you get invited
	for an on-site interview. On-sites are really fun! They fly you out,
put you up in a hotel, then give you a whole slew of interviews. I
think I had 4 interviews at my on-site. Then, you get flown back and
your recruiter will give you an update in a week or two with either
the offer or the rejection.

# Getting Ghosted

The unfortunate truth about interviewing is that companies will ghost
you all the time. Companies generally do this when they want to reject
you, but they also want to keep the door open so that if they need to
hire more, they can. It's dumb and most of the time if I don't get a
response in a few weeks to a month I assume I got rejected.

But Nicholas, you ask, is there any way to prevent that? Well, kinda?
Referrals can help with ghosting. Generally a referral will get you to
the phone screening round, which means that at the very least you
won't be ghosted.

You can also go via certain unconventional routes such as Google's
[foobar
challenge](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/the-foobar-challenge-googles-hidden-test-for-developers-ed8027c1184/).
Having gotten the foobar challenge myself, I'm not sure if it was
worth it. I spent a lot of time working through the levels, only to
have it plop me into the first stage of the Google recruiting
process. Which, I guess is better than being ghosted, but it took a
lot of work just to get sent another online coding screen.

You can try to get to the recruiter assigned to NYU (often recruiters
work like admissions officers in that they have specific domains). But
you need to find their email and they might not respond anyways. Ah
well. That's the life of a tech job applicant.

# Communications

I don't know why, but recruiting emails are some of the most
suspicious emails ever. They have lots of spelling mistakes, weird
formatting and don't come from the right domains. Often times
recruiters are contractors and are identified with a separate
recruiting firm.

Check your spam and double check that the email addressed to "Nicolas
Yan"" about a job opportunity isn't actually an email from Facebook
recruiting.


# Interviews

A lot of digital and physical ink has been spilled about technical
interviewing. I'm not gonna go into depth here. If you want a good
guide, read something like [Cracking the Coding
Interview](https://smile.amazon.com/Cracking-Coding-Interview-Programming-Questions/dp/0984782850/ref=sr_1_2),
or the millions of guides online.

If I were to offer something new, I'd recommend that you practice
problem solving skills above all else. Doing individual problems is
great, but general techniques for problem solving are equally
important. In my case, I'm just coasting off my math problem solving
skills. A great book for this is [How To Solve
It](https://smile.amazon.com/gp/product/069116407X/ref=ox_sc_act_title_1?smid=ATVPDKIKX0DER&psc=1)
by George Polya. What's great about this book is that Polya designed
it to give you an overall gist of problem solving techniques in the
first few pages. You can read those pages, lose interest (as
I totally...didn't do), and still learn a lot.

Another important aspect is to mimick the interview conditions. Google
for instance is infamous for doing phone interviews in a Google
doc. Or to prepare for on site interviews, write code on a
whiteboard. If you can practice with a friend who can mock interview,
that's great too.

In general I wouldn't obsess too much about technical interviews. A
lot of people online (\*cough\* /r/cscareerquestions \*cough\*) tend
to exaggerate the amount of Leetcode one should do. While specifically
practicing interview questions can be good, I find that programming
regularly and have taken a halfway decent data structures/algorithms
course is enough for interview questions. If you are not programming
regularly or have not taken a decent data structures and algorithms
course, try to do so to prepare for interviews. Cracking The Coding
Interview will have some sections on data structures and
algorithms. If you want a more thorough treatment, you can use
something like [Introduction to Algorithms by Cormen, Leiserson,
Rivest and
Stein](https://www.amazon.com/Introduction-Algorithms-3rd-MIT-Press/dp/0262033844/ref=sr_1_1)
also known as CLRS. As for programming regularly, you can reference my
[CAS CS
guide](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2019/08/19/nyu-cas-cs-guide.html) for
some tips.

Again, don't worry too much about learning every algorithm or data
structure under the sun. The questions that your interviewers come up
with are questions where they understand the solution and can judge
potential answers. They're probably not gonna ask you about red black
trees cause, let's face it, nobody remembers how the hell to write a
red black tree.

I suppose, if you must, you should review the standard data structures
like arrays, linked lists, trees, graphs, etc. Recursion, dynamic
programming and other techniques are good too. If you're applying to a
more math-y position like a ML engineer or a data scientist, you
should review statistics, machine learning, probability, and so on.

Ultimately though interviews are as much about how you communicate and
how you think. I've had interviews where I didn't get the solution
immediately, but I communicated well, and therefore got the
job. Practice thinking out loud and communicating your problems. Along
with that, make sure to practice the soft skills in
interviewing. Smiling and talking about yourself are as important in
an interview as programming ability.

But again, don't worry too much about interviews. You'll learn as you
go.


# Offer

If you've done everything right and the correct people have deemed you
worthy, you get an offer! Offers are pretty great. You get a nice
salary number (usually about 7k-10k a month), plus other benefits like
free housing (or a housing stipend), healthcare (yes, healthcare for
interns!) and a transportation allowance.

Negotiating intern offers isn't *really* a thing, but hey, try it out
and maybe you can get something. I know graduate students can
negotiate a little. Your recruiter isn't gonna rescind your offer over
a little haggling.

The main pressing issue with an offer is the deadline. NYU has what's
called an on campus recruiting (OCR) policy. Unfortunately, NYU does
not have a great one for internships. They require companies give you
a minimum of 3 weeks to decide for your offer. Which...isn't a lot of
time if you still have other applications going on.

There's no real good answer on what to do if this happens to
you. Some...more realpolitik people than myself have recommended
accepting the offer, then rescinding if you find something better. I
disagree with that approach. For one, it's a little unprofessional in
my view. Companies may be massive machines worth billions of dollars,
but you are screwing over your recruiter. But also that strategy can
backfire as some companies may or may not remember your
rescinding. Plus if you're rescinding Amazon to take Google, does it
really matter that much?

So yeah, there's not a great answer to this issue. Just make your
choices and try to not look back[^1].

[^1]: Or your wife will turn into a pillar of salt

As for accepting offers, I'd like to emphasize that a Big N job is
just like any other job. You should analyze the job as a fit for you
and you only. Not your Facebook friends who will like your job status
post. It's tempting to think "OMG Google is so awesome!!!" when you
get the offer, but Google is a big place and maybe the team you got
isn't the best fit.

I'll explain in the future the green and red flags that come with a
job, but here's some quick advice. Your company will probably sit you
down with an employee who will explain the details of your offer and
what team/division you will be in. Or, at the very least they'll
explain the general format of your internship. This is an important
session. You are now the person in control. You should try to ask as
many questions as you can to eek out whether you want to work there. Some good questions to ask include:

"Do interns get new projects or are they fixing bugs?"

"What time do you leave work?"

"Do you guys use continuous integration?[^2]"

[^2]: Really any of the questions on the [Joel
    Test](https://www.joelonsoftware.com/2000/08/09/the-joel-test-12-steps-to-better-code/) are good ideas

"Could you give me an example of a previous intern project?"

I know, there's a 99% chance you'll look at the salary and accept
immediately. And really, it's only three months, so even if it sucks,
you're out of there before you know it. But you should still be
careful to make sure that you're going to be in a healthy, productive
work environment where you can learn a lot.

# No Offer

If you don't get an offer, don't take it personally. The process is
extremely random and again, nobody has a perfect batting record for
job applications.

Besides, there's a lot of options that are as good or arguably even
better. Big tech companies are great, but there are drawbacks. For
one, you're often working in a small corner of the codebase, on some
project that affects some tiny part of the company, that frankly has
probably already been built by some other team in a different
division. If you want to make a big splash or have a diverse set of
tasks, a big tech company is not the place. A smaller company will
offer more freedom and diversity in tasks.

Plus the *internal tools*. Oh man, if you want a rant, just ask me
about my experience with internal tooling. It's really bad.

Another possibility is that you may just not have enough experience
for a big company. I know, it sucks to hear that you're not
experienced enough. But legitimately, experience is important for
making the most out of a Big N job. Large companies have a lot going
on and it can be pretty tricky to adapt and be productive. I'm not
sure I would have done great if I had interned at a Big N as my first
internship. Plus there's the pressure of a return offer or even a
fulltime offer at a Big N which can be unneccesarily stressful.  I'm
gonna make a post on getting your first internship, and what you
should look for in your first job. It's quite different that what you
may get at a Big N company.

Regardless, you shouldn't give up. Continue applying to other
companies and apply again next year if you still want a Big N job.

# Conclusion

Hopefully this has been helpful. Let me know if you have any
questions, feedback or concerns. Also, the title of this post is an
homage to Steve Yegge's post [Get that job at
Google](https://steve-yegge.blogspot.com/2008/03/get-that-job-at-google.html)
and the follow up post, [Get that job at
Grab](https://medium.com/@steve.yegge/get-that-job-at-grab-eea6de1d8421). Please
read those two excellent posts and anything else that Steve Yegge has
written, such as the [platforms
rant](https://gist.github.com/chitchcock/1281611), the [Tour de
Babel](https://sites.google.com/site/steveyegge2/tour-de-babel), and
so on.
