---
title:  "What's A Computer? A Guide to NYU CAS CS: Part II"
date:   2019-11-12 20:00:00 -0700
---

Welcome back to my guide to NYU CAS CS! Hope you enjoyed the last
post. Here's a few other topics that I feel are important for CS
majors to know.

# Class Consciousness

**Go to class**

**Go to class**

**Go to class**

Seriously. Nobody has ever gotten a better grade in a class by not
attending. Yeah yeah, I know you have a "reason" you're not going to
class. The professor sucks. You're just too far behind. You don't want
to wake up early[^1]. You'll just end up more confused by going to
class. You can just teach yourself with YouTube.

No.

Sorry, but no. All of those excuses are bullshit. Professor sucks?
Alright, so you may not get a lot pedagogically out of the class, but
you can learn a lot about how they grade, how they think and what
they're planning on putting on the exam. Plus even if a professor
isn't great, going to class is still better than nothing.

[^1]: Guilty.

Too far behind? Going to class will at least give you a roadmap of
what you need to learn. Class isn't just about learning new
material. It's about learning what you don't know. Getting confused is
a sign that you don't know something that you should know. Which is
great! Better to be confused in class than on an exam.

And if you don't have the willpower to show up to two classes a week,
something tells me you're not gonna have the willpower to sit through
8 online lectures cause you skipped out on a month's worth of classes.


Going to class is especially important in CS because professors don't
always follow the textbook carefully. It's easy to get tempted because
professors usually don't take attendance but without a textbook or
guidance, it's really hard to make up the knowledge.

You've heard this a million times and honestly this advice isn't gonna
stop most people from skipping class. But at least I can say I told ya
so.

# Eventual Consistency

I'm always amazed at how few students take advantage of NYC tech
events. There's always something cool happening in New York. Whether
it's [Brooklyn JS](http://brooklynjs.com/), [React
NYC](http://brooklynjs.com/), [Rust
NYC](https://www.meetup.com/Rust-NYC/), [DigitalOcean
NYC](https://www.meetup.com/DigitalOceanNYC/) (best food), there's always some
sort of cool tech meetup going on.


But why attend non NYU meetups? After all, NYU has plenty of tech
clubs and non NYU people are scary. For one, you get to interact with
bona-fide software developers. Which can be a really great thing if
you're looking for work. Or just getting a feel for what programming
is like as an everyday job. Or want to find someone who can
mentor/teach you.

Another great benefit are the talks. Meetup talks aren't always
consistent since they're done completely on a volunteer basis, but
when they're on point, they're on point. A great meetup talk can be
fun, interesting, and remarkably informative. Definitely read the talk
descriptions before you go, but even if they aren't great, consider
attending just for the people.

Also there's every college student's favorite thing: free food. And
sometimes it's *good* free food---catered stuff with soda, beer and
wine. Definitely a boon.

There's also a few other events that are useful for CS
majors. Hackathons are a big one. They're an excellent way to force
yourself to write code, planning, skill or quality be damned. This is
wonderful, as the biggest barrier in programming is just getting
started. You can get out of your head and just write the damn code.)

But at the same time, hackathons have their limits. For one, they're
not often conducive to long term projects. You can and should take
your hackathon projects and work on them after the event, but
unfortunately it's not very common. Especially since the code in a
hackathon is generally not fantastic, since it's being written
extremely quickly and without too much care.

Another limitation of hackathons is the lifestyle they encourage. Part
of the joy of a hackathon is staying up all night, cramming junk food
and pounding coffee. Which is fun for the first few times. Then, at
least for me, it gets old. Maybe I'm just getting grumpy in my old
age, but sitting all night in a plastic chair, feeling progressively
worse from the lack of sleep, the caffeine and the junk food, just
doesn't sound great. And it doesn't really reflect the reality of
programming. Jobs (hopefully) don't require desperately programming on
little to no sleep in order to make a deadline.

But hey, don't let my grumpy kvetching stop you from enjoying
hackathons. They're truly fun, memorable experiences for a lot of
people. If they sound interesting to you, I have a [whole
post](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2019/12/05/hackathon-guide.html)
outlining everything you need to know about hackathons.

Finally, there's conferences. Conferences are tricky cause they tend
to cost money to attend. Often lots of money. On occasion the
organizers will offer discounted or even free tickets to students. One
opportunity I had that I really appreciated was [Racket
School](https://summer-school.racket-lang.org/2018). I was able to
attend for free including my flight out and accommodation. I got to
learn about Racket and language oriented programming from the creators
of Racket. A very awesome opportunity for (basically) free.

# Clubs

NYU has quite a few CS clubs, Torch being one of
them. [Tech@NYU](https://techatnyu.org/),
[BUGS](https://bugs-nyu.github.io/) and
[ACM](https://cs.nyu.edu/acm/site/) are some other great clubs.

You should, of course, attend meetings at any/all of these clubs. More
importantly, you should get involved in running these clubs! Each and
every person I know who helps run the tech clubs at NYU wants more
people who can contribute. Whether it's figuring out the logistics of
room reservations or helping teach a workshop on front end
development, every bit is appreciated.

BUGS in particular has some very cool projects that they're working
on, such as an [Albert API](https://github.com/BUGS-NYU/schedge). If
you want some stuff to put on your resume, hit them up.

# Git Good

Learn git. This is a rehash of my CSO advice, but really it's
applicable to every single CS student. You can have a job that doesn't
use your data structures knowledge. You can have a job that doesn't
use Java or C or Python. You basically can't find a job that doesn't
use git[^3].

There's quite a few [great](https://try.github.io/)
[resources](https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials)
[online](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2) for git.

And yeah, it is a pain at first. And you will run into complications
where your git repo gets mangled or has to be rebuilt. But in the long
run it's certainly worth it.

[^3]: Google is actually a very notable example. They use their own
    *shudder* proprietary system called Piper. If you've ever worked
    at a large tech company, you probably know why I'd shudder at the
    mention of proprietary internal tech.


# Open Source

Another benefit of learning git is that you can start to participate
in open source! Open source is great because it allows you to build a
portfolio and contribute to some major projects. You can work on
anything from the internals of programming languages to front end
frameworks to other people's personal projects. This is an amazing way
to practice contributing to large codebases. Which, ultimately, is
going to be a lot of your work if you program for a living. Knowing
how to write code is great. Learning to read code is arguably as
important.

Plus it's a great way to get your name out there. If you can get some
recognition in the open source community, then you could easily parlay
some of those contacts into a job.

# Email: Use It

I've found that people don't use email to its fullest. For one, you
should email as many people as possible. Met someone cool at an event
and want to keep in touch? Shoot them an email? A conference costs too
much? Send them an email asking about scholarship tickets. Want a job?
Write an email asking for one[^4].

[^4]: That has legitimately gotten me a job.

The important part is to be utterly shameless about email. Send emails
to *everybody*. I mean I've sent emails to CEOs of billion dollar
companies. I've sent emails to the creators of Python, of
C#/TypeScript and of Swift/Clang. Send emails asking for jobs. Send
emails asking for money (for your club, obviously not for
yourself). And definitely send follow up emails. Chances are the
person who didn't respond to you just forgot about your email. Or the
email got buried in their inbox. Think about all the emails you forget
about in your inbox. Unless you've sent two or three follow up emails,
you haven't done enough.

Once again, there's [an entire
post](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2019/12/19/sent-from-my-iphone.html) on
email

# Conclusion

That's all for now. If I come up with more general topics to write
about for CS majors (or if someone emails me with other topic ideas), I'll
write a third part. But until then, I hope this advice is useful and
that you make the best of your time at NYU, studying CS or otherwise.
