---
title:  "What's A Computer? A Guide to NYU CAS CS: Part I"
date:   2019-08-19 9:14:36 -0700
---

So you've decided to become a CS major. Maybe you like playing video
games and want to make your own. Maybe you've been tinkering with
computers your whole life and want to make it into a career. Maybe you
just want to make some damn money. Maybe you're just curious about the
field. Well you're in luck! NYU can be a wonderful place to kickstart
your CS career, *as long as you know what to do*.

NYU has a lot going for it: world class faculty, an amazing location
in a top tier tech city, and a plethora of tech companies in the
vicinity. At the same time, NYU doesn't quite have the same benefit
that schools like MIT, Berkeley or CMU offer. Our recruiting scene
isn't as active; our tech community not as vibrant and our course
options not as deep. How does an ambitious, driven CS major such as
yourself surmount these problems? How do you show up your jerk friend
who got into MIT? Well read on to find out!

# Get A Damn Job

CS is a very tricky field in that so much of programming is not taught
in classes but learned on the job. This is true no matter which school
you attend. I highly encourage you to get at least one or two
internships over the course of your degree. They'll provide you with
extremely valuable experience and knowledge. Experience is also the
only true arbiter of whether you'll like programming as a
career. Better to figure that out while you're still in school versus
in the real world.

You may be saying at this point "How can I get a job? I don't know
anything about programming". And that's certainly true. But your first
job, while the hardest to get, will ultimately help you the most. So
how do you get your first job? I'm going to expand on this in a future
post, but it boils down to gaining technical skills, networking like
crazy, and applying applying applying.

I'll explain how to get technical skills momentarily. As for
networking, networking simply means going to events, keeping an eye
out for technical people and getting to know them when possible. You
don't have to be a slick Sternie with business cards and elevator
pitches. Just be eager, listen and make sure to get contact info.

All of this is moot however if you don't apply to jobs. And don't just
apply to Google[^1] and call it a day. Apply *everywhere*. I like using
sites such as [BuiltInNYC](https://www.builtinnyc.com/),
[AngelList](https://angel.co/), [StackOverflow
Jobs](https://stackoverflow.com/jobs?so_medium=StackOverflow&so_source=SiteNav),
[Hacker News](https://news.ycombinator.com/jobs). You can (and should)
be picky after you get the offer.

[^1]: I'll go over getting a job at Google, Facebook, etc. in a later
    post. Yeah yeah, there's a lot of later posts.

Oh, and this job should be **paid**, no matter what. Doesn't have to
pay well, but it should be paid, no matter what.

# <del>Treat</del> Teach Yourself

So how do we get the technical skills necessary for a job?

One mistake I see plenty of students making is assuming that their
courses are enough. Don't get me wrong---courses are super important
for building your foundation in data structures, algorithms and other
crucial topics. But it's equally important to build up a knowledge of
practical development topics like full stack web development,
deployment and DevOps, databases, etc. NYU certainly offers courses on
these topics, but they're often electives that can only be taken later
in the degree. If you want to get internships, you need to teach
yourself.

Plus if you teach yourself, classes will become significantly, almost
shockingly easier. Y'know those people who are annoying good at CS?
They're not just magically amazing at programming. They just practice
outside of class.

I'll admit, teaching yourself sounds really intimidating at
first. Where do you go for information? How do you get unstuck? These
are all great questions. Fortunately, we're in kind of a golden age
for programming info online. Some of the sites that people find
helpful include [Codecademy](https://www.codecademy.com/),
[freeCodeCamp](https://www.freecodecamp.org/),
[/r/learnprogramming](https://reddit.com/r/learnprogramming/) and so
on. If these don't work for you, that's fine (they didn't for
me). Search around and find your own sources.

As for questions, well, this is also another blog post (I have quite a
few planned!), but the gist is to use sites like StackOverflow or
GitHub to find potential solutions to your problem or even ask new
questions of your own. For that, you'll want to get good at Googling
problems. Generally you'll have an error message that you can copy and
paste. From there it's a matter of reading the StackOverflow pages,
trying to figure out how to apply the solution to your code, looking
at a different page, etc.

If that sounds frustrating, yeah it is. But that's also a gigantic
part of programming. We don't get paid the big bucks for nothin'. That
being said, as you get more experienced you start to recognize bugs
more often. Soon the bug that once took you 3 hours to fix will only
take you 30 seconds.

A great technique that I use is to take breaks. Let your mind rest and
do something else. Go for a walk. Cook dinner. Play a sport. Then when
you go back to your code, the bug might just jump out at you. It's
surprising, but this technique does work. Programming is **hard** and
sometimes your brain needs rest. Granted, you need the time to take
breaks, so if you're pulling all-nighters to finish projects, this
won't work.

And of course, you can always reach out to your professors, your
friends or [me](https://nicholasyang.com/) for help.

My recommendation for getting started is to pick something that sounds
vaguely interesting and Google around. Try doing a tutorial or two,
see if you like it. If you don't, that's fine---you can always pick
another area. But if you do, then hey, now you have a specific
interest!

Some cool topics:

 - Front end development
 - Back end development (REST APIs, GraphQL, etc.)
 - Graphics (ray tracing, graphics engines, etc.)
 - Compilers/Programming Languages
 - Systems programming
 - Functional Programming

# Life is Suffering

Okay, overdramatic a little. But there's something to be said about a
little suffering. If you go on RateMyProfessor, as most college
students do, and look at CS professors, there will be a few people
with similar pages. I'm not going to name names, but they'll generally
have mediocre ratings and very high toughness scores. These professors
are **great**. You should take them if at all possible.

Why, Nicholas? You ask. Why should I subject myself to such an awful
experience? For one, you'll learn more. These
professors-who-shall-not-be-named are tough because they demand
excellence of their students. They want students to learn the hard way
and dammit that's good. You may think that you're getting away with
something by taking easier professors, but all you're doing is not
developing the necessary skills to be a good programmer.

Second, it's important to keep in mind who posts to
RateMyProfessor. Generally it's people who do very well and people who
don't do well at all. A professor who is challenging will get a lot of
reviews from people who received bad grades and decided to lash out
with a low review. Of course, some professors have low reviews for
other, more valid reasons. Don't take those professors if possible.

Third, these classes aren't as bad as they're often made out to be. A
lot of these professors don't actually fail half their class. If you
put in the work and do all the required aspects (labs, homework, show
up to class, etc.), then you'll do just fine. It's only if you don't
show up to class and don't do the work that you'll be in serious
trouble.

I know, I know, this seems like one of those things your parents told
you "builds character". But the truth is that it really does build
character. Programming is a lot of figuring it out, whatever *it[^2]*
may be. Putting yourself in a situation where you need to figure it
out, no matter what, is an excellent way to determine if you like
programming. If you're trawling through pointers and you realize you
hate it, then great! You got this realization before you graduated
with a degree in Computer Science. And if you love it, then you know
that nothing can stop you.

Your major shouldn't be something you like doing when it's easy. It
should be something you love when it's hard and painful.

[^2]: There's a Kotlin joke in there somewhere.

# Work Above All

Going off the previous point, I want to make one last
statement. Programming is a field associated with nerds. And yeah,
there's a lot of programmers who are nerds and there's a lot of nerds
who are programmers. But ultimately your skills as a programmer depend
on whether you put in the work, not whether you've seen all the Star
Wars movies, or whether you've built your own computer, or I dunno,
been to Comic-Con. And your skills especially don't depend on not
showering (yes, even you Stallman).

On the flip side, programming and CS are not subjects restricted to
just the nerdy. You can program and dress well. You can program and
ice skate or dance or sing. You can program and go to parties (though
probably not at the same time).

Programming belongs to those who do it well and with passion. That's
it.

This may seem vacuously true. I hope it does. But if doesn't, then
just know that as long as you put in the work and love the craft, you
belong as a programmer.

Thanks for reading. In the next post I'll probably talk about good
practices for taking classes, going to meetups and clubs.
