---
title:  "Hey Man I Have An Idea: Developer Edition"
date:   2020-01-26 20:00:00 -0700
---

Before I covered the entrepreneur side. Now let's do the developer
side.

# Do You Want It?

Do you want to do a startup? If not, then don't even entertain the
idea. There's no point.

If you do want to do a startup, make sure it's for the right
reasons. If you can't get a job offer, don't go and do a startup as a
backup option. Don't do it to get rich. Don't do a startup to prove
how smart you are. Do a startup because you genuinely want to build
something of worth. Do a startup because you want to solve a problem
that you care about. Do a startup to create shit.

# Evaluate Your Co-Founder

Before you even think about the idea, you should ask yourself if you
want to work with the person who's giving the idea. The person who you
decide to work with is far more important than the idea. You can
always change ideas. You can't (easily) change cofounders.

Ask: Do you trust them? What skills do they have? What experience do
they have? Do you have a pre-existing relationship (family, friend,
romantic) with them that could be a potential issue?

If you do not want to work with them, then shut it down.

Treat this evaluation almost like a job application. If you want, ask
to see their resume. Or snoop them on LinkedIn or their personal
website. See if they have any experience in the industry related to
their idea.

"Business" is not a skill. Ask them to clarify in terms of concrete
actions.

# Evaluating Ideas

Companies follow a very specific philosophy for hiring: It's better to
reject a good candidate than accept a bad one. Hence, if even one
interviewer is hesitant or iffy on a candidate, the company
rejects. You should follow the same rule when evaluating startup
ideas. It doesn't matter if the idea *might* be good. If you aren't
100% sure that it's a good idea, right this second, reject.

Some people may say that you only see the appeal of certain ideas if
you're in a specific niche. That may be true, but you don't want to
waste a year or two of your life (worth at least 6 figures in salary
plus all the other missed opportunities) on an idea that *could* be
good.

When evaluating ideas, you should always ask yourself if you would use
the product. And be honest! Don't say "maybe, yeah, I could see myself
using xyz". No. You either want to use it or you don't. And if you
don't want to use the product, why are you working on it?

# Get Out

Let's say you're not interested. How do you get out?

Start by making some non-committal noises about how the idea looks
very interesting and you can definitely see a niche. Do not criticize
the idea, as that will only lead to a flurry of justification and
debate. Often times people who pitch startup ideas to strangers are
vigorously and viciously defensive of their idea. Don't provoke them.

If you're a student or early in your development career, you can make
some small claims about how you're not sure if you're ready to work on
such a big task. Play up how inexperienced you are. Make it sound like
you don't know anything.

If that doesn't work, then just try to exit the conversation as
quickly as possible. Sometimes this isn't easy. Sometimes it's a
relative or family friend who you can't duck. But just continue making
non-commital but positive statements until you can leave.

If you feel it is necessary, send the person an email thanking them,
telling them that the idea sounds great and that unfortunately you are
just *so* busy and cannot work with them. Again, avoid critiquing the
ideas, otherwise you will just end up in a passive aggressive email
argument. Keep an open mind, it genuinely could be a good idea that
you don't understand.

# Get Your Share

Let's say you are interested? How do you get your share?

First, understand that you are holding almost all of the cards. You
are the one who can actually make this idea reality. You are the one
who will be writing code, who will be deploying and maintaining the
product.

Therefore, you are not an employee. You are not, god forbid, an
intern. You are a founder. Do not do the work of building a company
without the position, equity and credit that comes with building a
company.

Treat any such offer of unpaid employement with the contempt it
deserves. Then, reevaluate whether you want to work with someone who
is attempting to devalue your labor.

# Manage Expectations

Be realistic, most importantly to yourself, but also to your new
co-founder. Don't promise them the moon, the sky and the stars.

Developers are remarkably bad at estimating tasks. Especially novice
developers. Remember that non developers don't always understand
this. If you say 3 weeks they will take it as 3 weeks **or less**. Do
not give exact numbers without serious thought, preliminary work and
research.

Unless you are an actual professional with proper work experience, you
should explain that you are a student and that you will have to take
time to learn new tech, to make mistakes and to fix bugs that are new
to you. Your co-founder should be understanding. If they are not, if
they get angry, or if they start talking about making the impossible
possible, reevaluate whether you want to work with someone who does
not acknowledge reality.

# Conclusion

Startups can be a great opportunity. But you should do your due
diligence on the idea as well as the person pitching it before you
commit your time, energy and code to the project.
