---
title:  "Is It Too Late?"
date:   2020-06-04 20:00:00 -0500
---

Another notes from the ~~underground~~ /r/csMajors.

I recently read a post asking if it's too late to apply to fall
internships. This surprised me because we're a solid 3 months out from
fall.

Then I realized that if you've read that Google and Amazon finish
hiring for the summer in mid January, you'd assume that all companies
finish hiring that early.

In reality you can apply to an internship, go through a couple
interviews, receive an offer and be on the job in a few weeks. How is
this possible? What voodoo magic allows such speed?

> Apply to small, local companies

So much of the talk around internships is focused on the large
companies. If not Google and Amazon, at least Stripe and AirBnb. But
there's plenty of solid small companies doing great development work
who don't have to sort through an applicant pool in the tens of
thousands.

These companies don't fly people out for internships or pay relocation
fees. They don't put you up in corporate housing. They're not going to
hire their 1-2 interns three or more months in advance.

But they pay better than most college jobs, give you work experience
and a chance at the big leagues next summer. Plus you're only
competing against other locals for the spot.

I've had this happen to me. In one case I applied to an up and coming
hedge fund that I knew about via a family member. In the other case I
cold applied to a smaller tech company. Both times I had a job within
two weeks.

Apply local, apply frequently and keep your ear to the ground about
job opportunities in your network. If you hear about it from contacts,
you're probably competing against 5-10 people instead of 50-100. You
might even be competing for a spot that didn't exist before.

If you're at home right now without an internship, try sending out a
few applications or cold-emails. You could[^1] be working in a few weeks!

[^1]: If you're a US citizen that is. Sorry international students, work authorization kinda sucks.
