---
title:  "Hit The Ground Running: Starting From Zero"
date:   2020-03-06 20:00:00 -0700
---

You want to be a CS major but you don't have much programming
experience. Maybe you've taken CSCI-002, the non major intro CS
course. Maybe you just started learning Java. Maybe you haven't taken
anything at all. That's fine! You can 100% learn to program as a CS
major at NYU.

Likewise, if you switched into the CS major a little later than most,
you can certainly accomplish a lot with the time that you have.

However I would like to offer some advice on how to hit the ground
running and make the most of the following years.

# Programming Is A Skill: Hone It

The best analogy I can provide for this is sports. I used to fence. In
fencing, there'd be some people who would mysteriously get good at
fencing very quickly. These people would be really annoying because
you'd start out kicking their ass, and suddenly year or two later
they'd be kicking yours. How did this happen?

## Practice

For one, they practiced. A lot. They'd have group lessons, one-on-one
lessons and open fencing.

Think of programming the same way. You're practicing a skill. Your
classes? Group lessons. Tutoring? One on one training. Your homework?
Personal practice.

Use each of these sessions differently. Group lessons are great for
picking up general ideas. You can learn the overarching big
picture. Tutoring is great for filling in gaps and solidifying this
larger knowledge. But homework is the most important for actually
learning to program. Just like fencing: you can do all the group
lessons and all the one-on-one lessons you want, but ultimately the
best way to become a good fencer is to fence.

Set some goals for yourself on practicing programming. Maybe you can
do at least 15 minutes of programming each day. Maybe you can aim
write code 5 days a week. Whatever the goal is, try to stick to
it. The people who got really good at fencing would be incredibly
consistent with their training. Even if they didn't feel like it, even
if they had a lot of work, they'd show up at the fencing club. Try to
do that with programming.

It's okay if programming seems really hard. Training isn't easy. Your
brain should be struggling. Take breaks, eat well, get some
exercise. You're tackling a difficult task. It's okay if you don't
always live up to your goals. Try again the next day.

With practice, it's absolutely essential to do it conscientiously. If
you solve a problem in the homework, challenge yourself to find the
nicest possible solution. Is there a way to do this in fewer lines?
Could you use a different feature? What are the potential problems
with your first approach?

Try to ask "why" as much as possible while programming. Why are you
writing this? Why does this work? Why does it not work? Why are we not
approaching the problem in this way? It can be quite tempting to
program by mashing stuff together and guessing, but that won't get you
nearly as far.

## Cross Train

The second thing that helped these fencers become mysteriously good
was that they were almost always athletic. If not, they quickly became
athletic with cross training.

Similarly, try to cross train your brain. This may mean reading up on
[problem
solving](https://smile.amazon.com/gp/product/069116407X/). This may
mean doing math. Even if you're not able to program each day, try to
do something that will help you become a better programmer. Something
as dumb as learning to type properly or learning keyboard shortcuts
can really help you in the long run. Tooling is a very important area
to get down. MIT has an [excellent
course](https://missing.csail.mit.edu/) on tooling and other
miscellaneous areas. I'd consider learning either
[Emacs](https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/) or
[Vim](https://www.vim.org/), as they're very very useful tools.

You can also
[read](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/02/10/how-much-do-you-read.html)
about programming. Even if the topic isn't directly related to your
current courses, you'd be amazed what random info is useful later on
in the degree.

There's only so many hours in a day that you can program. But you can
supplement this time with other work like reading, practicing problem
solving and tooling.

## Niches

The third thing these fencers would do is develop what I'd have called
(bitterly) a cheap trick, but in retrospect I'd describe as a
niche. Basically they would figure out one area they were really good
at and use it to their advantage.

If you can find a specific area that you like in programming, perhaps
web development, systems development, graphics, compilers, etc., then
you can start to get an area of expertise. As you build this area of
expertise, your programming skills around that area will get very
strong. This in turn will look really good when you start applying to
jobs.

It's important however that this is a genuine interest. Otherwise
it'll just feel like more work.

# Get A Job

This is really a rehash from my
[other](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2019/08/19/nyu-cas-cs-guide.html)
[guides](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/01/02/first-job.html), however
I'd like to reemphasize it here. You may think that you're not
qualified to get a programming job just yet. But you'd be
surprised. There's a lot of great programs for freshmen and sophomores
who are new to CS and for underrepresented communities, programs such
as [Google
STEP](https://buildyourfuture.withgoogle.com/programs/step/),
[Facebook
University](https://www.facebook.com/careers/FBUEngineering), [Two
Sigma Freshman
Internship](https://internships.twosigma.com/internship), etc. In
general freshmen in college aren't *that* good at programming. You
probably have better chances than you'd think.

Even if you're not a freshman/sophomore or an underrepresented
minority, you can still apply to local companies for
internships.

If you're worried about not knowing data structures or algorithms,
then try to self study just a little bit to get the job. Some people
recommend doing MIT OpenCourseWare or reading books like Introduction
to Algorithms. I find that extremely overkill. First, going through a
full on course in algorithms takes too long. And second, Intro to
Algorithms is like a thousand pages long! Nobody has time for that. My
recommendation is to get something like [Cracking the Coding
Interview](https://smile.amazon.com/Cracking-Coding-Interview-Programming-Questions/dp/0984782850/)
and as you work through problems, look up info just to solve that
problem. This may mean you'll spend a couple days trying to understand
a single problem. That's fine! At least you'll have a far more
practical knowledge of these algorithms.

However I've certainly had jobs where they didn't ask me any super
technical data structures questions in the interview. Hopefully if a
company knows that you're relatively unexperienced, they won't ask
anything too technical.

# Classes Aren't Everything

Because you're starting from scratch, there's a chance you'll spend
most of your NYU CS career completing required classes. These classes
can totally teach you a lot. That being said, they're not
everything. Far from it in fact. The vast majority of practical
programming is done outside of these classes. It's really important
that you learn this practical programming as early as possible. This
will make getting internships easier and help you with the harder
classes.

You may think that you can just wait to take Applied Internet
Technology or whatever. But if you're starting from scratch that'll
take until your senior or junior year! That's not good enough since
you'll want at least an internship for the summer after junior year.

Really try to do [side
projects](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2019/12/21/side-projects.html) and
learn skills like Git, Terminal, etc. (you can learn them
[here](https://missing.csail.mit.edu/)). Try to [learn new
languages](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/02/25/learning-languages.html)
and maybe attend a [hackathon or
two](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2019/12/05/hackathon-guide.html).

This may be a slightly controversial statement, but in my eyes NYU's
core CS curriculum of Data Structures, Algorithsm, CSO and OS is the
**bare minimum** for a CS major. You should aspire higher than that.

# You Can Do It!

This may seem intimidating and I truly apologize if so. The truth is
you don't have to do any of this. Plenty of people do just fine
without following this advice. That being said, I believe that if you
do what I've recommended, you'll have a far easier time becoming a
great programmer and an employable programmer. You may find yourself
becoming a better programmer than people who have been programming for
years and years. Which is pretty awesome.

I truly believe that anybody can do this. You just have to get started.
