---
title:  "Take A Gap Year"
date:   2020-07-04 20:00:00 -0700
---

Gap years and gap semesters are on everybody's mind. Plenty of people
online are declaring that they are going to take a gap year instead of
suffer through online classes. We'll see how many follow through.

I suspect the number of people who follow through will be less than
expected. I have firsthand experience in gap years. I took one between
high school and college and I'm about to embark on a gap semester for
next fall. I've noticed that when I talk to people about gap years,
they have quite a few hesitations. Even when they claim to be
interested in a gap year, they seem to talk themselves out of
it. Their response inevitably becomes "great for thee, not for me".

Why is that?

I'm not entirely sure, but I have compiled various arguments, some
paraphrased, and I'll give my responses.

### But but...I'll be behind my friends

This matters a lot less than you'd think. In high school a few years
can make all the difference; 14 year olds are very different than 18
year olds. But in college it's not a huge deal at all. You'll probably
befriend seniors when you're a freshman and vice versa. A few years
difference isn't a huge deal when you're all almost adults.

As for your friends, nobody will care if you graduate a year later
except those who have nothing better to care about. Plenty of them
will stay in school to do masters programs or even PhDs. Even if your
friends ditch you, which is pretty weird of them, you can always make
new friends[^1].

[^1]: I hesitate to make this a point here but it's not uncommon for
    you to grow apart from your high school friends. That's life.

### I don't know what I'd do

That's fine! You can figure that out as you go along. Sure, some
people do those overly prepared gap years where they go on
humanitarian trips to Burundi or something but those people are
lame[^2]. But a lot of people just wing it. I did a lot during my gap
year but I also spend a decent amount of time hanging out enjoying my
free time. That's probably where I learned the most about being self
motivated and working on my own projects.

Not to mention, a gap year is basically how life works after
college. Granted you need to pay the bills but hey, you might need to
do that during the gap year. Plenty of 18 year olds figure out what to
do without college.

Some people claim they'd do nothing but play video games. I seriously
doubt that. Even if you did, maybe something good will come out of
that? You could end up making a streaming channel or start an esports
career. Also...if that's a problem, maybe you should confront said
problem. It might be good to combat it before you head off to the open
ended, video game heavy place that is college.

[^2]: I kid. It's a totally fine, albeit pricey way of spending your
    time.

### I can't waste time, I need to go make money ASAP

That's fair. Some of us really do need to get an education and start
making money stat. However we are lucky to be in a field where you can
get a decently paying internship even out of high school. It takes
some existing programming knowledge and maybe a lucky contact or two,
but it is possible. If you're in college, it's even easier. Plenty of
companies run fall internships. I know more than a few people who have
taken time off to intern. Even if you have no job experience, [some
smaller companies will definitely hire
you](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/06/04/is-it-too-late.html).

It's also not a good idea to rush through your degree. Many people
don't end up sticking to their original major. They realize halfway
through that no, they don't like chemistry. If this realization comes
too late, they may be forced to take another year to graduate. Or
worse, they end up graduating with a major that they don't actually
like. A gap year can allow you to explore the field and verify that
you actually like it, saving you money in the end. Measure twice cut
once, as the saying goes.

### That's too much free time. I just have to stay busy.

Yeah yeah that's some nonsense that high school drills into you so
that you can work insane amounts. If you feel guilty for not working,
you might seriously need a gap year. Life will give you as much work
as you want. If you've been programmed to need work, then you're on a
path to burnout. I went to a particularly intense high school and I've
seen my classmates burn themselves out because of this nonsensical
notion. A lot of them push themselves to extremes without even a
specific goal in mind.

You should enter college with a set of goals. What do you want to
accomplish in college? Otherwise you're spending 70k a year to figure
out what to do during said 70k-year. Better to figure that out before
during your 0k gap year.

This notion goes against the aspirational view that college graduates
from previous generations hold---namely that college is place for you
to discover yourself and your passions. That's great and all, but that
view made a lot more sense when college didn't cost 70k a year. If you
still hold on to this view, by all means, go spend your money. But
understand that it's a rather privileged sentiment[^3].

[^3]: This may seem contradictory because gap years are often
    considered privileged activities. I'd argue that they're actually
    very economically sound decisions as long as you're not in urgent
    need to make cash ASAP

Plus if you need to stay busy, you will stay busy! A gap year doesn't
have to be backpacking across Europe. Plenty of people work or do side
projects or learn new topics during their gap year. What people
generally mean is that they're worried without the structure of
school, they won't stay busy. What I want to know is why they need to
be busy if they naturally would not be busy.

### Gap years will look bad on my resume

They have never been an issue whatsoever for me. In fact my gap years
were a net benefit because I was able to work during them. Even if
your gap year is purely pleasure, it won't have a negative
effect. Plenty of young people around the world take time off to
travel. If someone asks you what you did during a gap in your resume
and you explain that you traveled/partied/relaxed, they will probably
respond with "cool! That sounds awesome". If they don't, well they're no
fun.

Plenty of countries, such as Australia, New Zealand, South Africa,
South Korea, Israel, Singapore, etc. have a culture of taking a year
to travel. Kids from those countries go on to have perfectly normal
careers.

### My parents won't let me

Another kinda reasonable one. If you value your relationship with your
parents and they truly do not believe in gap years, it might not be
worth it. Just remember this is your life. If you're not ready or
interested in college, your parents aren't going to change that. This
might be a time to push back. Your relationship with your parents does
not have to be a continuous function.

Feel free to use any of the above arguments with your parents.
