---
title:  "Do You Like It?"
date:   2020-05-14 20:00:00 -0700
---

Go on any forum for CS majors and you'll find endless questions
asking, inquiring, begging, pleading to know if CS is for them. This
is not a surprise. CS is a subject full of challenging courses,
confusing concepts and a crapton of imposter syndrome. It's also a
subject that most students are unlikely to have encountered in high
school. With all of these challenges, how is one to know if they are
destined to be a CS major?  Easy:

> Do You Like It?

It's a deceptively hard question. Part of the reason it's so hard is
that it's easy to confuse with other questions. Such as:

 - Am I good at it?
 - Do I have experience with it?
 - Do I get good grades?
 - Is it easy to me?
 - Do I like math/physics/design/etc?
 - Are other people trying to get me to like it?
 - Am I trying to like it?

There are many forces that push students to study a subject, none of
which are whether they like it. In high school you really have no
choice; you have to "like" all of your subjects to some extent to get
good grades. Likewise students feel pressure to study a financially
rewarding subject. Others may have pressure from family, peers or
simply society as a whole.

There's also the trouble of self actualization. Plenty of young adults
have (sadly) never been asked for their true opinion. Figuring out
what you like is a fairly fundamental, opinionated question. It's not
easy.

# Incorrect Questions

Before we discuss knowing if you like CS, let's go over the other,
incorrect questions.

### Am I Good At It?/Do I Have Experience With It?/Do I Get Good Grades?

People love to think about their current abilities. It's an
understandable habit: you want to compare yourself to your peers. If
you're better than them in a certain area, clearly you should
pursue it in earnest.

I don't agree. This is what I call a position versus velocity problem:
it doesn't matter where you are, it matters how fast you're moving
forward. If you start a CS degree with absolutely zero knowledge, but
you put in time and energy towards learning CS, you'll do
significantly better than someone who started out with a great
foundation but stagnated in their practice.

This happens all the time in sports. Bob beats Alex in a match, and
from then on Bob has in his mind that he's better than Alex. His
friends talk about how Alex is so good, so fast, but Bob brushes it
off saying "ah whatever, I beat Alex." But come rematch time two
months later, Bob might be surprised to see himself losing to
Alex. Turns out, if Alex is spending every day training and
conditioning, it doesn't really matter that he lost to Bob two months
ago. Bob is moving faster[^1].

[^1]: If you want an example, watch the documentary Rocky 2

How do you put in time and energy? For some people they can do this
almost at will. Doesn't matter if they like or dislike the topic, they
can put in the work and get better. I'm not one of those people. I
need to like what I'm doing. I don't believe I'm uncommon in that
regard. Hence the actual question: Do you like it?

### Is It Easy to Me?

Easiness can be a sign that you like CS. We do tend to like the things
we find easy. But we're getting things reversed: if a person likes a
subject, then they'll work at it more, which means they'll find it
easy. Just because you find it easy doesn't mean you like it.

Easiness is again a position based judgement. You currently find your
work easy. As you progress and go up the levels in CS, I guarantee
that you will find some area that is not easy. Everybody struggles
with something. I've struggled with understanding client versus server
code, with typechecking, with figuring out goddamn OAuth. If you're
doing CS because it's easy, you may run into trouble when it stops
being easy.

### Do I Like Math/Physics/Design?

Another common fallacy. Students believe that because they like a
subject close to CS, they must like CS. And that may be true! I know
plenty of CS and math majors. But it's not a certainty. If you like
math/physics/design/whatever, then go major in
math/physics/design/whatever.

It'll be a lot easier to get good at that subject if you like it and
people who are good at their subject tend to be more employable.

Of course this isn't always true. If you happen to like a subject that
offers less financially rewarding career options, you're in a tougher
spot. It's not really my place to give advice either way. I can't tell
you to study a subject that may put you and your family into an
unadvisable financial situation, nor can I tell you to study a subject
that you may not like and therefore will end up begrugingly
studying. My only advice is that there are multiple subjects that
offer financially rewarding careers, not just computer science. If you
truly don't like CS, consider these other subjects.

### Are Other People Trying To Get Me To Like It?

This is a partial extension of the previous paragraph. Whether it's
your family, your friends, whoever, people are always trying to get in
your business and tell you what to do with your life. Unfortunately
some of these people are easier to ignore than others. If your parents
are paying for your education, you might have to listen to them.

That being said, this is ultimately your life. You're the one putting
in the hours and weeks and years of your life into this subject. If
you don't like it, then this work will be significantly harder. I've
met far too many people who were clearly not studying CS by their own
choices. They end up with weaker skills and fewer career options. Is
it possible to overcome this and learn to love CS? Probably. But it's
definitely not easy.

### Am I Trying To Like It?

This is another variation on trying to like CS. It's arguably the
hardest to figure out. Some signs that you may be trying to like CS is
if you're going through each course and hoping to find the area that
makes the subject "click"...and you're a junior or senior. Or you
endlessly procrastinate your work. Or you keep blaming the teachers,
the class, the textbook, etc.

This can be a really hard question to ask yourself, especially if
you've put a lot of time and energy into learning CS. But don't fall
into the sunk cost fallacy. At a certain point you'll need to accept
that CS might not be your field.

# Do You Like It...

With that over, let's go over the right question and its follow
ups. These are all variants on "do you like it?", since really, that's
the only question.


### ...When It's Hard

It's easy to like programming when it's easy. It's easy to like
*anything* when it's easy. The real question is whether you like it
when it's hard. Do you like programming when you're debugging a nasty
issue? Do you like it when you're confused and need to do your
research? Do you like it when your code needs to be fixed?

Of course the answer isn't always yes. Nobody's happy 100% of the time
while programming. But you should aim to be at least somewhat fine
while going through these challenges.

This isn't just some fetishization of suffering by the way. If you
enjoy the challenging parts of programming, you'll be more likely to
willingly seek them out. Which means you'll get better faster. If you
stick to the easy bits, you might still improve, but it'll be at a
slower rate. Again, position versus velocity.

### ...When The Situation Isn't Ideal

One thing I noticed about programming versus other subjects was how
willing I was to do it even in inconvenient situations. Even if I was
tired, hungry, whatever, I'd still get sucked up into programming.

This isn't always true. Sometimes I'm too damn tired or hungry to
write code. But it's a good sign if you do occasionally get so wrapped
up in programming that you forget to eat. Or do your homework. Or
[change out of your
towel](http://www.paulgraham.com/foundersatwork.html).

### ...When The Material Is "Boring"

One of the surprising things I've discovered in CS is that I like
certain topics that I recognize sound absolutely boring. Memory
allocators? Not a great dinner party topic, but totally awesome!
Dependent types? Who cares? Garbage collection? Bo-ring.

Now this isn't always the case. There's definitely CS areas that put
me to sleep. But if you can get excited about the less sexy stuff,
i.e. not the world-changing OMG AI/ML/NLP whatever, then that's a good
sign.

# Plus Or Minus

If you're reading this article and thinking "oh no, I don't like
programming that much", stop. Breathe. Let the impostor syndrome
fade. Then reanalyze your situation. You don't have to like
programming 100% of the time. When you're starting out, programming is
a completely new world to you. It should be confusing and
challenging. Sometimes it takes a little time for the small bits and
bytes of joy to spark into liking or loving programming.

And it could just be that you haven't learned programming in the right
time in your life. I tried to learn programming several times before
it stuck. Sometimes I catch myself and am still amazed that I actually
*know* this stuff.

This post's purpose isn't to discourage people from learning to
code. It's to give a goalpost for those of you who are on the fence
about CS. If you read this post and everything in the incorrect
section resonates, while everything in the correct section doesn't,
then perhaps you should reevaluate your CS career. Or don't! Prove me
wrong. Just remember, it's up to you to decide how much time you want
to spend doing things you don't like.

I also hope that this post is freeing for some---for those of you who
got B's and C's in intro to programming but couldn't stop playing with
Python. Or for those of you who had to repeat data structures but
started teaching themselves JS. People pay far too much attention to
arbitrary goalposts like grades. Your grades will matter for your 4
years of college. Your enjoyment will matter for your entire career.
