---
title:  "Chill On The Leetcode"
date:   2020-05-21 20:00:00 -0700
---

I'm a habitual browser of /r/csMajors and /r/cscareerquestions. I'm
not really sure why. I'm not looking for advice and honestly I find a
lot of the posts unrealistic, bordering on actively discouraging. For
instance, when a person asks about getting a job, the answer provided
is inevitably for them to "grind Leetcode".

Leetcode, for those of you who don't know, is a site where users can
practice technical interview problems. You can take your pick of
interview questio and solve it with your language of choice. These
questions are usually some sort of programming challenge involving
data structures and algorithms---kind of the programming equivalent of
a brainteaser.

This advice isn't without merit; for better or worse technical
interview problems are the standard way of screening candidates. Not
knowing how to solve these questions can hurt your job opportunities
while getting good at these questions can help you get a job without a
strong resume.

But what a lot of people are missing when they blindly advise to
"grind Leetcode" is that, well...Leetcode is *boring as shit*.

I know when I've tried to practice Leetcode, I get bored within
minutes and sneak a peek at the answer. This isn't because the
questions are too easy mind you. The times that I've tried Leetcode,
I've left discouraged and worried about my impending interviews.

Yet I've done alright in interviews. I've gotten offers from
prestigious companies. What's up with that?

# Nobody's Perfect

I've come out of quite a few technical interviews confident I messed
up. I took way too long to figure out the solution, or I didn't even
find the solution. I had a lot of bugs in my code. I couldn't figure
out improvements easily. Only...to get the job. Why is that?

> No **Sane** Person Expects Perfection

What's lost in the Leetcode grind is that a sane interviewer doesn't
expect you to solve the problem immediately. The entire point of the
technical interview is to see how you think. If you were to solve the
question immediately, it wouldn't help them. All it'd tell them is
that you've seen the question before. You're meant to struggle with
the questions so that the interviewer can see how you problem solve.

You do need some base level of knowledge. If you don't know about
hashtables, you probably won't do very well with most questions.

But, you protest, I could just pretend to not know the question and
come up with the answer. Sure, you could. It'd take some pretty
convincing acting skills and a fairly trusting interviewer but you
could. It's up to you how much deceit you want in your application
process.

# Communication

Okay, but even if the point isn't to see every question, Leetcode
still helps with gaining the necessary problem solving skills, no?

Yes and no. Leetcode certainly gets you better at solving interview
questions. It doesn't help you get better at *communicating* this
process.

Technical interviews aren't just the interviewer telling you the
problem, you thinking really hard, and then you giving a
solution. Maybe if you're [Richard
Feynman](http://wiki.c2.com/?FeynmanAlgorithm). Technical interviews
are a dialogue between you and the interviewer. Sitting at a desk and
neurotically solving questions on Leetcode won't help you convey your
thought process to your interviewer.

Again I'm not some problem solving phenom. However I am a decent
technical communicator. I know how to write a not terrible proof and I
can bang out an essay or two without too much trouble. When I'm
explaining a solution, I describe why I've chosen this solution (often
it was the first one that popped into my head), how I'm implementing
it, what potential problems it can have, etc. Even if I'm way off
track, the interviewer should have a good idea of what's in my head
and can use that to steer me in the right direction.

Listing potential problems is a really good skill by the way. I
learned it by way of math. The art of proofwriting consists of
composing an argument, then attacking it as viciously as
possible. Writing good code is the same. You should be constantly
thinking of potential problems with your code, whether that be space
constraints, possible errors, edgecases, or even---when at
scale---gamma rays from space coming and flipping bits on your hard
drive.

If you're set on practicing interview questions, I'd recommend doing
mock interviews with a friend. Ideally on an actual whiteboard or a
Google Doc. They should know the solution(s) to the question and be
able to provide hints, just like an actual interview.

# Sometimes You Lose

Another response I've gotten to my anti-Leetcode stance is something
along the lines of "well I got a Leetcode hard problem and they
expected me to solve it completely".

And sorry, that sucks. But that's not the majority of
experiences. Otherwise Google's hiring rate would be close to zero. In
that situation, *you got unlucky*. You got the hardass who decided
that everybody needs to be
[tourist](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gennady_Korotkevich). Try
again next time.

So yes, you *could* spend your days practicing Leetcode, training for
that unfortunate situation where you get a hardass interviewer. For
me, I want to live my damn life.

# What Instead?

If I had to give recommendations on preparing for interviews, I'd
recommend learning how to solve problems and communicate these
solutions. A good way to learn these skills is to study math,
specifically proofs. Math is equal parts coming up with a solution and
convincing other people that your solution is correct. Some particular
areas you should explore are discrete math and abstract algebra. Both
are connected to CS and will help you with reasoning about data
structures.

Programming also helps. People claim that real world programming isn't
related to interview questions whatsoever. I'd say it's about 80-90%
not related. But if you program a lot, you'll start to pick up common
tricks like using a hash table when you need fast lookup, or keeping
data pre-sorted. Plus programming uses your problem solving skills,
while working with others uses your communication skills. Two for one!

Practicing with a partner, as mentioned before, is a good option.

# You Can Do It!

I wrote this post because I'd feel so discouraged before interviews
because I never "grind Leetcode". And yet it's what everybody seems to
recommend online.

Imagine if you went on every fitness subreddit and the only advice
people would give if you wanted to lose weight was to "run a few miles
every day". That's it. Nothing about picking up a sport, nothing about
watching your diet, just running a few miles each day. If you didn't
like running, you'd probably get discouraged, because clearly that's
the only way to lose weight.

The same is true with Leetcode. There's nothing *wrong* with doing
Leetcode to get a job. But it's not the only way to get a tech
job. You can practice in many different ways and still pass a
technical interview.
