---
title:  "Things You Shouldn't Assume"
date:   2020-05-12 10:00:00 -0700
---

I've found that students make certain assumptions about classes. Some
of these are based on their experiences in high school. Some of these
are based on an...optimistic set of expectations. Some are based on
delusion. Here's a quick list of assumptions you should never make:

# The Professor Will Follow The Textbook/Syllabus

I took a particularly challenging course where more than a few of my
peers would skip class and then ask me or other people what we covered
in the textbook. Unfortunately for them, the professor followed the
textbook in the same way most people follow IKEA instructions. They
ended up having to reconstruct what the professor covered from messy
notes and hazy recollections. Guess who did well in that class? Not
them!

This is especially true for higher level courses. Higher level courses
have less supervision and are taught by tenured faculty, who tend to
march to their own drum. It's a known fact that no professor 100%
agrees with the textbook. Maybe if they wrote the book, but even then
they take liberties. Besides most textbooks aren't meant to be used cover
to cover. It's completely expected that a professor will emphasize
certain topics over others.

If you're lucky enough to get a syllabus, which is rare in higher
level courses, do not assume it will be followed. Professors teach
what they want to teach. That's it.

# The Professor's Slides Will Make Sense

I've definitely made this mistake. You skip a few lectures, telling
yourself the slides are posted on classes, only to discover the slides
are three photos of a circuit board and a reminder that the test is on
Thursday. Just because the professor posted slides doesn't mean
they're useful.

# The Test Will Be Well Written

Nobody teaches you how to write tests. There's no required PhD class
called Test Writing 101.

I bet that the majority of tests are written a day or two before the
exam. Ever wonder why that Algebra final was so damn hard?  Or why the
test has random typos? Or why the questions appear to be slightly
altered homework problems? Your professor probably wrote it at the
last second because they were busy filling out some grant proposal, or
parenting their kids, or doing some research. Or just
procrastinating. Professors are human after all.

Remember that the professor's baseline is themselves, an expert in the
field with decades of experience. When they estimate whether or not a
test it is easy, it's like Mike Tyson estimating the boxing skill of
an elementary schooler. It shouldn't be a surprise if a test is
mindbogglingly hard or stupifyingly easy. From 500 feet up, it's all
the same.

And no, professors won't try their tests on other students as a
baseline. See above.

# The Test Will *Actually* Be Cumulative

A side effect of tests not being written in optimal situations is that
the test will reflect what's on your professor's mind. That will often
be what they last taught.

Of course you should still review previous material and study the
entire curriculum. But it's fairly common for tests to be end material
heavy. End material is most likely more interesting to the
professor. It's more advanced and likely involves the central theme of
the class. There's definitely some classes, albeit more in math than
in CS, such as Calculus III or Theory of Probability that have a
central punchline: Stokes', Greens and Gauss for Calculus III and
Central Limit Theory/Law of Large Numbers for Theory of Probability.

Students can shoot themselves in the foot because they assume that
they know the end material since it was just taught and besides, the
professor only spent like a day on Stokes', he spent a whole week on
vectors.

Again, don't take this as an excuse to not study the whole
curriculum. Just remember to polish up the end material.


# The Class Will Be Like Last Year

Professors are wild untrained beasts. Would you assume a tiger follows
a pattern? Then why a professor?

# AP Credit Means I'm Prepared

AP credit can mean anything from a little to nothing. If most
professors had their say, AP credit wouldn't count for most
subjects. The issue with distributing credit on a curved test is that
you're not really checking if a student knows the topic: you're just
checking where they are on a bell curve. Don't assume you know the
subject just because you got a 5.

# Grades Will Follow A Rubric

If your professor gives a rubric, it's quite possible they'll follow
it. It's also quite possible they won't. I definitely know professors
who assign grades in a more...loose manner. This can work to your
advantage and to your detriment.

Always verify that your tests and homework were properly graded. These
aren't always graded by your professor (almost never in the case of
homework) and sometimes your professor can have a different view than
the grader.

# The Professor Said It Was Easy So It Will Be Easy

Again, the professor is saying something is easy from the perspective
of an expert with decades of experience. Don't assume that they know
what easy means for you.

# Teaching Is Your Professor's Main Focus

Professors are first and foremost *researchers*. They went to school
for research, they get paid to research, they love to research. Some
professors will absolutely treat teaching as a priority. Others will
not. There's nothing you can do to change that.

This is the biggest difference from high school. In high school your
teachers main job is to teach. Some may not teach very well, making
them bad teachers. There are professors who do not teach well but are
excellent professors because they do good research.

Unless a professor is an utterly fantastic or utterly terrible
teacher, no attention will be paid towards their teaching.

Note that I'm talking about tenure track faculty. Clinical faculty do
have teaching as their main focus. There's definitely some excellent
clinical faculty who are great teachers.

Try not to take sub-par teaching too seriously. Generally the
professor doesn't mean to teach poorly. They simply have their actual
job to do.

# Professors Are Different Than You

Professors may seem like these perpetually stoic authority figures who
go home and silently think in the dark about their field of
research. But actually they only do that part of the time. Otherwise
they're pretty normal people.

People ask me about emailing professors, talking to them during office
hours, etc, and they always seem to be coming from a place of fear, or
at least overwhelming caution towards the professor. Like if you don't
address every professor as "professor" or "doctor" they will start
cackling and devour you, the naive little undergrad who dared to call
them by their first name. That's not really true. Oh sure some
professors do want you to call them professor. But other professors
don't care if you call them Nicholas, Nick or Nicky^[1]. And plenty of
professors have a sense of humor.

[1]: Please double check before calling a professor Nicky.

The other big difference between high school and college is that your
professors are not that far away from being your colleagues or even
your friends. It's not impossible to imagine that in a few years
you'll be a postdoc or assistant professor at NYU. Or that you'll keep
in touch with a professor after graduation and socialize with
them. Remember that professors were originally like you and me: nerds
who liked studying a particular subject.

I'm not saying you should befriend every professor, or that there
aren't some professors who prefer a more rigid set of boundaries
between student and teacher. Just remember that professors are human
and try to treat them as such, instead of an academic robot who
lectures and grades your work.
