---
title:  "How Much Do You Read?"
date:   2020-02-10 20:00:00 -0700
---

"Reading?", you inquire. "I didn't get into computer science to read!"

Yes yes, reading is scary. But it's profoundly important if you want
to be a better programmer. Contrary to what some may think, you can't
learn everything from writing code and doing Leetcode problems.

Reading can give you insight into the minds of the greatest
programmers who ever lived. Reading can teach you the lessons learned
through struggle and strife. Reading can help you fill in the
inevitable gaps of your programming knowledge.

You can have all the raw talent, all the problem solving, technical
kick ass skill in the world, but without reading, you won't have the
knowledge to really make an impact.

# What Should I Read?

Well, for one you're reading this blog. That's a good start! But don't
stop here. I try to link to other blogs when possible. Follow those
links and read those posts.

A few blogs that I really like are [Coding
Horror](https://blog.codinghorror.com/), [Joel on
Software](https://www.joelonsoftware.com/), [Steve
Yegge](http://steve-yegge.blogspot.com/), [The Old New
Thing](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/oldnewthing/), [Lambda the
Ultimate](http://lambda-the-ultimate.org/), [Alexis
King](https://lexi-lambda.github.io/index.html) and [Paul Graham](http://www.paulgraham.com/articles.html).

You don't have to read all of these, but maybe spend some time
perusing old articles and see what you find. Blogs are great because
they offer little snippets of wisdom and opinions. I've learned a lot
from reading old Joel Spolsky and Jeff Atwood posts.

If I had to give a few good starter ones, I love [The Magpie
Developer](https://blog.codinghorror.com/the-magpie-developer/),
[Exploding Offer
Season](https://www.joelonsoftware.com/2008/11/26/exploding-offer-season/),
[Parse Don't
Validate](https://lexi-lambda.github.io/blog/2019/11/05/parse-don-t-validate/),
[Steve Yegge's Platforms
Rant](https://gist.github.com/chitchcock/1281611), and [How to Get
Startup Ideas](http://www.paulgraham.com/startupideas.html).


# Books

Oooh even scarier. Books. Next thing it's novels and then it's just a
slippery slope to a career in literary criticism. Don't worry, I
promise I won't recommend *Wuthering Heights*.

In all seriousness, books are so important. Y'know those textbooks
that professors put on the syllabus that nobody reads? They're filled
with super useful information!

Of course, you don't have to read them through. I don't think I've
read any pure computer science book cover to cover. Skim them from
time to time and see if you pick up some stuff.

Other than textbooks, there's quite a few amazing books on
programming. [Jeff Atwood's recommended
reading](https://blog.codinghorror.com/recommended-reading-for-developers/)
is a good start. I'd also include [Coders at
Work](http://www.codersatwork.com/) which is an excellent series of
interviews with top programmers, [The Soul of a New
Machine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Soul_of_a_New_Machine)
which is a great historical perspective on building computers in the
70's, and [Smart and Gets Things
Done](https://www.amazon.com/Smart-Gets-Things-Done-Technical/dp/1590598385)
an amazing book on hiring good developers[^1] by Joel Spolsky

[^1]: It's also great for getting hired as it gives you an insight
    into how interview processes should work

Of course, there's the granddaddy of all computer science books, [The
Art of Computer
Programming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Art_of_Computer_Programming). It's
very math heavy and suuuuuper dense but hey, if you can make it
through even a few pages, you'll learn a lot.

# Websites

Reddit, while a huge time waste in many ways, can be quite useful for
programming news. /r/programming is the main subreddit, but there's a
whole lot of other niche subreddits that are great such as
/r/rust[^2], /r/node, /r/javascript, /r/haskell,
/r/ProgrammingLanguages and so on. Don't go on /r/csMajors or
/r/cscareerquestions unless you want anxiety about Big N jobs,
constant careerist questions and salary flexing.

[^2]: Why this isn't /r/ust is beyond me

Want a great way to learn more? Unsubscribe from /r/funny and all the
other inane default subreddits, then subscribe to a bunch of
programming subreddits. At least you'll be wasting time learning
something.

The other interesting site is [Hacker
News](https://news.ycombinator.com/). HN is a kinda reddit clone run
by YCombinator, a famous startup accelerator. It's mostly tech news
based and has a very interesting, very unique culture. Some people
find it interesting and full of lively, intellectual debate. Others
find it simultaneously cynical and extremely naive, with overly
aggressive or dismissive comments interweaved with posts on the next
shiny new thing.

The truth is that both are true. Communities resist general
categorization[^3] as their inhabitants are constantly changing. One
can never step into the same subreddit twice. Go read it for yourself
and decide.

[^3]: Indeed, the one unifying characteristic of redditors appears to
	 be a tendency towards making overly general and dismissive
	 statements about reddit.


# Papers

If you lean more academic, papers are a great resource. Reading papers
can often be hard for students&mdash;even I struggle with it. Just
remember that you don't have to read papers cover to cover. Even if
you read just 20% of a paper, that's still better than 0%.

There's quite a few classic papers. I love [Reflections On Trusting
Trust](https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~rdriley/487/papers/Thompson_1984_ReflectionsonTrustingTrust.pdfq),
[No Silver Bullet](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/No_Silver_Bullet),
[the Bitcoin paper](https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf), and [On The
Cruelty of Really Teaching Computer
Science](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/On_the_Cruelty_of_Really_Teaching_Computer_Science).

If you want to stay up on the cutting edge, you can always read the
proceedings for various conferences such as PLDI, SIGGRAPH, OOPSLA and
so on.

# Skepticism

While reading all of these wonderful sources, it's important to keep a
sense of skepticism. Programming is a subject that has a lot of strong
opinions and strong personalities. It's very easy to read something
and think that this is the absolute truth and that things **must** be
done this way. It's also very easy to read a different thing the next
week and decide that this is the real absolute truth and that things
**must** be done this way. You see?

Keep an open mind, read everything in good faith, but don't take any
of it as gospel.

Ultimately nobody is completely right. Everybody has only the tiniest
fraction of the total collective programming experience. We all have
different backgrounds, different language preferences, different ways
of thinking. Reading and writing is what allows us to share these
different experiences and thereby improve the entire programming
community in the process. Without reading, you're stuck with only your
limited experiences and your limited knowledge. With reading, you can
erase these limits.
