---
title:  "Negotiation: A Quick Primer"
date:   2021-01-13 10:00:00 -0700
---


I love to negotiate. Some people don't. I guess they see it as
nervewracking or even rude. I find it fun. When else can you make
$5,000 simply by taking a few meetings and making a few points?

The core principles of negotiating are the same whether you're haggling
over a scarf in a Hangzhou market or deciding on pay for your new grad
job. Let's list them:

- The number you give will serve as a corresponding
  maximum/minimum.

If you say 100 RMB for the scarf, that will automatically become the
  lowest possible price you can demand. You can't go from there and
  ask for the scarf to be 80 RMB. The merchant has seen your
  hand. Likewise if you say your ideal salary is $120,000, you are
  unlikely to go up from there. Your recruiter has seen your hand.

With salary negotiation, have the recruiter give a number. Avoid at
all costs giving your current salary or any real quote.

- Always ask for more than you want.

Once the initial numbers are on the table, you need to respond. Your
response needs to be a lot more than you actually want.

If you want to pay 100 RMB for a scarf, ask for 50 RMB. If you want a
$120,000 salary, ask for $150,000. This is usually where people get
nervous. These numbers seem unreasonable. These numbers are
unreasonable. But they're not the end numbers. They're just
exaggerated claims so that when everybody settles on a final number,
it evens out.

In haggling the numbers the merchant offers are usually ridiculous as
well. You should give an initial price that is 30-50 percent of their
price. Not 30-50 percent off, but 30-50 percent of the original
price. If they quote you 200 RMB, ask for 80 RMB. Heck, 50 RMB might
not be bad.

- This is all a ritual. Play the game.

In haggling there is a very specific ritual to the process. They give
a price, you give a price, you offer different prices, they claim that
they can't afford to sell at this price, that their families will go
hungry[^1], yadda yadda. Eventually you walk away and they run after
you and give the true final price.

[^1]: This may seem callous but when you see it done multiple times, you start getting skeptical.

Salary negotiation is also a ritual. Unfortunately people don't know
it's a ritual, so when the recruiter starts going through the motions,
they get freaked out and worried that they'll lose the offer or that
the reccruiter is offended.

In the salary negotiation ritual the recruiter gives a price; you
pause and say that you'll need to consult with your family; the
recruiter will make some excuse on why you need to respond quickly;
you politely decline. If they insist, simply say that you need to talk
the offer over with your family.

Next meeting, you create some excuse as to why you're reticent to
accept the offer. Rent's really high, you have another offer, you have
a unique set of skills, etc. You can highlight what you bring to the
company. They'll likely respond with more money or you'll have to come
up with a number.

If they provide a second offer, you can decide if it's worth
it. Compare the offer to others on
[levels.fyi](https://www.levels.fyi/). Try to be above the average
offer on there, as old offers make the average lower than current
offers.

If you provide an offer, try to provide one that is slightly
unreasonable. The worst case scenario is that they accept it
immediately. That likely means you could have asked for more. If they
balk at it, then you're probably in the ballpark.

- Your recruiter doesn't care

I attended a [great
talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m1XdasrstCc)[^2] on salary
negotiations at Brooklyn JS. One excellent point the speaker, Matthew,
made was that the recruiter is likely way less invested in this than
you. They're not negotiating their money. To some extent they're
rooting for you. Recruiting a person already costs in the tens of
thousands. They're not going to blink at a few thousand more.

[^2]: Not the exact same talk but the Brooklyn JS one isn't on YouTube

Remember, this is their day job. A significant portion of their job is
to negotiate. A recruiter getting offended at negotiation is like a
cook getting annoyed at chopping onions.

- Any outrage is therefore either fake or unprofessional

If your recruiter acts outraged or betrayed then they're either trying
to guilt you or they're not a very good recruiter.

If they're guilting you, lose any compassion for them. They can be
your friend after negotiations. They're trying to win a game and you
need to respond accordingly. You don't let your opponent win in a game
of tennis because they're your friend.

Of course you should still be polite and nice. Don't play dirty.

If they're truly outraged, then you're dealing with a bad recruiter. I
don't have great advice here, but likely a bad recruiter is a sign of
a bad company. If the company only hires people who they can bully and
guilt, then that's a terrible sign.

- Salary isn't the only factor

A high salary is always nice, but a proper compensation package will
include several parts. If salary is a no-go, maybe you could ask for a
signing bonus? You could add to your vacation time or negotiate
paternity leave.

Stock is often where they'll budge. Giving away stock is in many ways
cheaper for the company and incentivizes you to stay longer. However,
beware of the [golden
handcuffs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Golden_handcuffs). If you
realize the job isn't a good fit, this can mean either forgoing the
stock part of your compensation or being stuck at the company for a
few years.

- Get another offer

Another offer is a great way to light a fire under your recruiter. A
higher offer is even better but again, salary is not necessarily the
most important factor. You could love the other company's culture, the
technical fit, the free bananas, whatever. As long as you can make the
case to the company that the other offer is really attractive, you
have a bargaining chip.

This should be higher, but I couldn't figure out a better place to put
it. Seriously, another offer is a great way to show you mean business.

- But another offer isn't necessary to negotiate

That said, another offer isn't the only way to negotiate. You could go
back to school. You could stay at your current job. You don't even
have to offer an alternative. Hiring is such a pain that recruiters
will give you more money just to avoid the possibility of recruiting
another person.

- Make the call

After a couple back and forths, you should decide whether to accept
the offer or not. While the point of negotiation is to optimize your
compensation, you shouldn't let that take over your actual
decision. Sometimes in the process of negotiating, I convince myself
that the offer is totally unreasonable and that I am entitled to a
higher comp. That can be a good mental technique for staying firm
while negotiating, but it's not a healthy mindset long term. You're
still likely making far more than the average college grad.

I've accepted a lower offer before because I knew that the company
would provide a better tech fit and really cool opportunities. Sure,
sometimes I wonder about the money, but the enjoyment and learning
I've gotten from my work has far outweighed the money.

I won't say that money doesn't matter. It does. But it's only one
aspect in a much larger, much more nuanced discussion of how you plan
on spending 40 hours a week.
