---
title:  "Email: A Quick Guide"
date:   2019-11-20 20:00:00 -0700
---

People don't use email to its full potential. They hem and haw about
sending an email. They wring their hands about minor wording. And
worst of all, they don't think to send emails when it would really
benefit them.

Email is a tool. It can be used as a crowbar, prying open previously
closed doors. It can be used as looking glass into a multitude of open
source communities. And it can be used as a weapon, to trade insult
and parry potential attacks.

I am by no means a master of email. But I've learned a few things
about sending emails. Let's explore them together.

# Email Etiquette

The first rule of email etiquette is to not overthink it. As long as
you're not on either extreme of the casual/formal spectrum, nobody
will notice. Think about how little you care about other people's
emails. When was the last time you were offended by someone's style in
an email? Not the content or the implied emotions, but the actual
style of the email. If you can actually come up with an example, I
don't think you need this section.

In school, I address the first email to a professor with "Dear
Professor" or "Dear Professor Lastname". If I notice that they sign
the email with their first name and I feel that their comportment is
casual enough, I'll switch to their first name. One cultural rule of
thumb I use is that Americans tend to be a lot more casual. In general
born and bred Americans will be fine with first names. Other countries
vary. Some countries definitely have more decorum between professors
and students, such as France, Germany and other north-western European
countries. If in doubt, just keep using professor.

By the way, anybody who teaches, whether an adjunct or a tenured
professor, can be addressed as professor. At worst it's flattering.

In a work environment, I use first names with colleagues. This may
seem counterintuitive, but in a modern day workplace, that's totally
normal. Anything more formal just appears stilted or cold.

I sign emails with "Best", "Thanks", or "Sincerely", depending on the
context. Generally "Best" is a good bet no matter what. "Sincerely"
sounds a little too formal for everyday use. Always put "Best", a
comma, then a new line and your name:

<pre>Best,
Nicholas</pre>

As the email chain progresses, I use fewer and fewer greeting/closing
statements. The first email will use "Dear Professor" and
"Sincerely/Best". After that *maybe* I will put in a "Hi" and
"Nicholas", but most likely I'll just skip to the actual
content. Especially if the other person is doing that as well.

# Omit Needless Words

*The Elements of Style* by Strunk and White may be considered outdated
by many[^1], but I do love the classic advice of "omit needless words".

Before you send an email, go through each paragraph and remove as many
words as possible. Common targets include what I'd call throat
clearing words like "then", "actually", "also", "so", "thus", etc."

[^1]: I'd recommend *Dreyer's English* as a great modern alternative.

Try to think about the rhythm of your prose. If you want something to
be blunt and well understood, perhaps you should go for a short,
staccato sentence. Try to vary the length of your sentences to avoid
sounding like Hemingway or David Foster Wallace (too staccato versus
too legato). Does your prose read like an endless slog? Do yourp
sentences just go on and on and on? Or does your writing snap along,
fast and witty and easily digestible?

Read the email out loud and see if any words stick out as awkward. At
the same time avoid writing like you speak. We use far too many filler
words in our speech.

Keep in mind length. Nobody likes getting Tolstoy in email form. Maybe
you can move it to a separate medium, such as a blog post?

But enough pedantic nonsense about form. Let's talk about email's
uses.

# Email Random People

Well, not *random* people. But if you ever, for any reason whatsoever,
have an urge to talk to someone whose blog post you've read or whose
software you've used or whatever, then **do it**. Email them.

I know, you're about to say "But Nicholas, I don't know their
email". Well find it! Some people keep their emails on their GitHub
page. Others keep it on their website. If you have mutual contacts,
you can always ask your contacts for that person's email. Or you can
guess. As long as the email isn't sensitive in any form, you can guess
the person's email address and see what
happens. \<firstname\>@company.com is a good bet.

Try to keep these emails short and to the point. If someone is getting
an email from a random person, it needs to be enticing from the
start. Explain why you're emailing them and what you want in the first
few sentences.

# Mailing Lists

Mailing lists are how a lot of open source projects organize their
discussions. I'm personally subscribed to the Python and Ruby mailing
lists. They're a great way to see how an open source community is run,
as well as to see the decision making process for major programming
languages.

There's also other mailing lists such as the NYU CS Opportunities
list. The opportunities list can be pretty useful for keeping track of
potential positions, interesting events and anything else. Though
there is a decent amount of spam on it.

# Get It In Writing

One of the most important pieces of advice that I've gotten is to get
any sort of agreement, proposal or statement in writing. Email is
fantastic way to do that. You can and should use email as a personal
record of important conversations.

If you have a group project and your partner agrees to take over the
front-end while you do the back-end, maybe you should send an email to
them confirming this agreement. Then when your project has two
back-ends on the due date, you can forward the necessary emails to
your professor.

This is especially important if the other person has more power than
you. If you don't get something in writing with your boss, ultimately
it'll be your word versus your boss's word. Not exactly a great
situation.

# Word It Wisely

One side effect of email being such a powerful tool is that it's quite
possible to have it used against you. Therefore be careful about what
you send. If your email will hurt you if forwarded to the wrong
person, then don't send it. Either reword it or communicate via a
different channel.

You may say "but Bob is totally my friend! He won't forward that email
to Edward!" And sure, Bob could be your friend right now. But that
might not always be the case. And even so, what if Bob's emails are
compromised? Better to just not send it.

Also keep in mind your style. Even though it's totally cool to add
cursing and funny nicknames to your friends, make sure that it's not
so offensive that a simple forward will get you in trouble.

At work employers have access to all of your emails. Act accordingly.

# Lock It Down

Hopefully I've convinced you of some of email's power. I want to leave
you with one last piece of advice: secure your damn email. There's a
lot of criticism towards the mandatory Multi Factor Authentication on
our NYU accounts, but I actually think it's a very good idea. If an
attacker gained access to your NYU account, they could unregister you
from courses, effectively unenrolling you from NYU. Most importantly,
they have total access to your email. Think about how many accounts,
i.e. Facebook, Twitter, Reddit, you may have linked to that email. If
an attacker has access to your email, they can reset all of those
accounts' passwords and basically take over your life. Let alone read
all your embarrassing emails.
