---
title:  "Get That Big N Job"
date:   2019-11-14 20:00:00 -0700
---

So you want a job. Not just any job though. A job at a place like
Google, Facebook, Amazon, Microsoft, etc. In programmer parlance,
these are called "Big N" companies. As in, the Big 5, Big 10, Big "N"
companies in the tech world.

With these companies, I'd also include some of the newer, larger
startups, especially "unicorn" startups, or startups valued at over a
billion dollars. Places like Stripe, Lyft, AirBnb, Uber, Palantir,
Coinbase, GitHub, Reddit, etc. are all excellent places to intern and
highly selective. Sometimes they pay even better than regular big tech
companies.

There's also some tech finance companies that are very famous such as
Jane Street, Two Sigma, Akuna, etc. They pay **obscene** amounts. Like
in the 10-14k per month range. But their hours are often accordingly
tough and their application process exceedingly selective.

Another common grouping is FAANG, or Facebook, Amazon, Apple, Netflix
and Google. This is kinda flawed for a few reasons. For one, Apple
hires a lot more electrical engineers than programmers, and Netflix
doesn't even hire interns.

But anyways, you want one of these jobs. Whether it's for prestige,
money, or the awesome people, you want this job. How do you get it?

# Reality of Rejection

Well, for one, be prepared for a lot of rejection. Doesn't matter who
you are, or what you've done, you'll get rejected from
*somewhere*. Sometimes your application gets ghosted. Sometimes you
finish an interview and get rejected for no apparent reason. Don't
take it personally, even though it totally sucks.

As a result, apply to a whole bunch of Big N companies. Don't just
apply to Google and call it a day. Granted, if you don't want to work
at a specific Big N company, for whatever reasons, don't apply
there. But apply to as many as you can.

# Roles

There's basically three main divisons for interns at tech
companies. There's software engineering (SWE), product (PM), and
early-career roles.

Software engineering roles are pretty self explanatory. Yer a
programmer Harry.

Product roles are not as technical but more about digging into
requirements for a project, comparing them with the programmers'
responses, then doing stuff like creating estimates, managing
features, and so on.

The early career roles are interesting cases. These are the
programs like Google STEP, Microsoft Explore, Facebook University and
so on. They're aimed at freshmen and sophomores with some, but not a
lot of experience in programming. In these programs, students receive
more guidance and may alternate between product management and
software engineering roles.

# Timeline

Apply early. Big N companies start their process super super early. I
mean, almost a full year before the term in which you're
interning. Start applying for Summer 2021 positions in
July/August 2020. Monitor the sites and figure out when the
applications open. Sometimes this is really hard to figure out, as
companies' job portals are seemingly designed to be as confusing as
possible. Guess they have to weed out the people who can't navigate
terrible websites.

The reason you should apply early, beyond the possibility that all the
spots fill up, has to due with the way big companies recruit. There's
two parts of the recruitment process: hiring and team placement. In
some companies, such as Google, the team placement is done alongside
hiring. In others, companies recruit for a divison, then place interns
in specific teams later. Either way, the teams/divisions that are more
desirable tend to fill up early, whether due to returning interns
requesting that team, or specific requests by applicants. While any
division/team in a big company is still a great pull, a really well
placed team does come with more cachet and potentially more
interesting work.

# Process

The process usually starts with some sort of screen. This can either
be a coding challenge via something like HackerRank, or an actual
phone screen with a person. Even getting a screen is a good sign. It
means someone or some system read through your resume and decided to
put you into the pipeline.

Then, if the screen goes well, you may have either another phone
interview or an on campus interview. On campus interviews are great
because they're in person, but on your home turf.

After that, at some places, e.g. Google, you end up doing more phone
interviews to place you in a specific team. In others, you get invited
for an on-site interview. On-sites are really fun! They fly you out,
put you up in a hotel, then give you a whole slew of interviews. I
think I had 4 interviews at my on-site. Then, you get flown back and
your recruiter will give you an update in a week or two with either
the offer or the rejection

# Getting Ghosted

The unfortunate truth about interviewing is that companies will ghost
you all the time. Companies generally do this when they want to reject
you, but they also want to keep the door open so that if they need to
hire more, they can. It's dumb and most of the time if I don't get a
response in a few weeks to a month I assume I got rejected.

But Nicholas, you ask, is there any way to prevent that? Well, kinda?
Referrals can help with ghosting. Generally a referral will get you to
the phone screening round, which means that at the very least you
won't be ghosted. But other than that it's just a hazard of playing
the game. You can try to get to the recruiter assigned to NYU (often
recruiters work like admissions officers in that they have specific
domains). But they might not respond. Ah well. That's the life of a
tech job applicant.

# Communications

I don't know why, but recruiting emails are some of the most
suspicious emails ever. They have lots of spelling mistakes, weird
formatting and don't come from the right domains. Often times
recruiters are contractors and are identified with a separate
recruiting firm.

Check your spam and double check that the email addressed to Nicolas
Yan about a job opportunity isn't actually an email from Facebook
recruiting.


# Interviews

A lot of digital and physical ink has been spilled about technical
interviewing. I'm not gonna go into depth here. If you want a good
guide, read something like [Cracking the Coding
Interview](https://www.amazon.com/Cracking-Coding-Interview-Programming-Questions/dp/0984782850),
or the millions of guides online.

If I were to offer something new, I'd recommend that you practice
problem solving skills above all else. Doing individual problems is
great, but general techniques for problem solving are equally
important. In my case, I'm just coasting off my math problem solving
skills. A great book for this is [How To Solve
It](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/069116407X/ref=ox_sc_act_title_1?smid=ATVPDKIKX0DER&psc=1)
by George Polya. What's great about this book is that Polya designed
it to give you an overall gist of problem solving techniques in the
first few pages. You can read those pages, lose interest (as
I totally...didn't do), and still learn a lot.

Another important aspect is to mimick the interview conditions. Google
for instance is infamous for doing phone interviews in a Google
doc. Or to prepare for on site interviews, write code on a
whiteboard. If you can practice with a friend who can mock interview,
that's great too.

In general I wouldn't obsess too much about technical interviews. A
lot of people online (\*cough\* /r/cscareerquestions \*cough\*) tend
to exaggerate the amount of Leetcode one should do. While specifically
practicing interview questions can be good, I find that if you're
programming regularly and have taken a halfway decent data
structures/algorithms course, then you'll do just fine. Remember, the
questions that your interviewers come up with are questions where they
understand the solution and can judge potential answers. They're
probably not gonna ask you about red black trees cause, let's face it,
nobody remembers how the hell to write a red black tree.

I suppose, if you must, you should review the standard data structures
like arrays, linked lists, trees, graphs, etc. Recursion, dynamic
programming and other techniques are good too. If you're applying to a
more math-y position like a ML engineer or a data scientist, you
should review statistics, machine learning, probability, and so on.

Ultimately though interviews are as much about how you communicate and
how you think. I've had interviews where I didn't get the solution
immediately, but I communicated well, and therefore got the
job. Practice thinking out loud and communicating your problems. Along
with that, make sure to practice the soft skills in interviewing.

But again, don't worry too much about interviews. You'll learn as you
go.


# Offer

If you've done everything right and the correct people have deemed you
worthy, you get an offer! Offers are pretty great. You get a nice
salary number (usually about 7k-10k a month), plus other benefits like
free housing (or a housing stipend), healthcare (yes, healthcare for
interns!) and a transportation allowance.

Negotiating intern offers isn't *really* a thing, but hey, try it out
and maybe you can get something. I know graduate students can
negotiate a little. Your recruiter isn't gonna rescind your offer over
a little haggling.

The main pressing issue with an offer is the deadline. NYU has what's
called an on campus recruiting (OCR) policy. Unfortunately, NYU does
not have a great one for internships. They require companies give you
a minimum of 3 weeks to decide for your offer. Which...isn't a lot of
time if you still have other applications going on.

There's no real good answer on what to do if this happens to
you. Some...more realpolitik people than myself have recommended
accepting the offer, then rescinding if you find something better. I
disagree with that approach. For one, it's a little unprofessional in
my view. Companies are massive machines worth billions of dollars, but
you are screwing over your recruiter. But also that strategy can
backfire as some companies may or may not remember your
rescinding. Plus if you're rescinding Amazon to take Google, does it
really matter that much?

So yeah, there's not a great answer to this issue. Just make your
choices and try to not look back[^1].

[^1]: Or your wife will turn into a pillar of salt

# No Offer

If you don't get an offer, don't take it personally. The process is
extremely random and again, nobody has a perfect batting record for
job applications.

Besides, there's a lot of options that are as good or arguably even
better. Big tech companies are great, but there are drawbacks. For
one, you're often working in a small corner of the codebase, on some
project that affects some tiny part of the company, that frankly has
probably already been built by some other team in a different
division. If you want to make a big splash or have a diverse set of
tasks, a big tech company is not the place. A smaller company will
offer more freedom and diversity in tasks.

Another possibility is that you may just not have enough experience
for a big company. I know, it sucks to hear that you're not
experienced enough. But legitimately, experience is important for
making the most out of a Big N job. Large companies have a lot going
on and it can be pretty tricky to adapt and be productive. I'm not
sure I would have done great if I had interned at a Big N as my first
internship. Plus there's the pressure of a return offer or even a
fulltime offer at a Big N which can be unneccesarily stressful.  I'm
gonna make a post on getting your first internship, and what you
should look for in your first job. It's quite different that what you
may get at a Big N company.

Regardless, you shouldn't give up. Continue applying to other
companies and apply again next year if you still want a Big N job.

# Conclusion

Hopefully this has been helpful. Let me know if you have any
questions, feedback or concerns. Also, the title of this post is an
homage to Steve Yegge's post [Get that job at
Google](https://steve-yegge.blogspot.com/2008/03/get-that-job-at-google.html)
and the follow up post, [Get that job at
Grab](https://medium.com/@steve.yegge/get-that-job-at-grab-eea6de1d8421). Please
read those two excellent posts and anything else that Steve Yegge has
written, such as the [platforms
rant](https://gist.github.com/chitchcock/1281611), the [Tour de
Babel](https://sites.google.com/site/steveyegge2/tour-de-babel), and
so on.
