---
title:  "What's A Computer? A Guide to NYU CAS CS: Part II"
date:   2019-11-12 20:00:00 -0700
---

Welcome back to my guide to NYU CAS CS! Hope you enjoyed the last
post.

# Class Consciousness

**Go to class**

**Go to class**

**Go to class**

Seriously. Nobody has ever gotten a better grade in a class by not
attending. Yeah yeah, I know you have a "reason" you're not going to
class. The professor sucks. You're just too far behind. You don't want
to wake up early[^1]. You'll just end up more confused by going to
class. You can just teach yourself with YouTube.

No.

Sorry, but no. All of those excuses are bullshit. Professor sucks?
Alright, so you may not get a lot pedagogically out of the class, but
you can learn a lot about how they grade, how they think and what
they're planning on putting on the exam. Plus even if a professor
isn't great, going to class is still better than nothing.

[^1]: Guilty.

Too far behind? Going to class will at least give you a roadmap of
what you need to learn. Class isn't just about learning new
material. It's about learning what you don't know. Getting confused is
a sign that you don't know something that you should know. Which is
great! Better to be confused in class than in an exam.

And if you don't have the willpower to show up to two classes a week,
something tells me you're not gonna have the willpower to sit through
8 online lectures cause you skipped out on a month's worth of classes.


Going to class is especially important in CS because professors don't
always follow the textbook carefully. It's easy to get tempted because
professors usually don't take attendance but without a textbook or
guidance, it's really hard to make up the knowledge.

You've heard this a million times and honestly this advice isn't gonna
stop most people from skipping class. But at least I can say I told ya
so.

# Meetups and Events

I'm always amazed at how few students take advantage of NYC tech
events. There's always something cool happening in New York. Whether
it's [Brooklyn JS](http://brooklynjs.com/), [React
NYC](http://brooklynjs.com/), [Rust
NYC](https://www.meetup.com/Rust-NYC/), [DigitalOcean
NYC](https://www.meetup.com/DigitalOceanNYC/)[^2], there's always some
sort of cool tech meetup going on.

[^2]: Probably the best food and drinks for NYC Meetups

But why attend non NYU meetups? After all, NYU has plenty of tech
clubs and non NYU peole are scary. For one, you get to interact with
bona-fide software developers. Which can be a really great thing if
you're looking for work. Or just getting a feel for what programming
is like as an everyday job. Or want to find someone who can
mentor/teach you.

Another great benefit are the talks. Meetup talks aren't super
consistent since they're done completely on a volunteer basis, but
when they're on point, they can be fun, interesting, and remarkably
informative. Definitely read the talk descriptions before you go, but
even if they aren't great, consider attending just for the people.

Also there's every college student's favorite thing: free food. And
sometimes it's *good* free food---catered stuff with soda, beer and
wine. Definitely a boon.

There's also a few other events that are useful for CS
majors. Hackathons are a big one. They're an excellent way to force
yourself to write code, planning, skill or quality be damned. This is
wonderful, as the biggest barrier in programming is just getting
started. You can get out of your head and just write the damn code.

But at the same time, hackathons have their limits. For one, they're
not often conducive to long term projects. You can and should take
your hackathon projects and work on them after the event, but
unfortunately it's not very common. Especially since the code in a
hackathon is generally not fantastic, since it's being written
extremely quickly and without too much care.

Another limitation of hackathons is the lifestyle they encourage. Part
of the joy of a hackathon is staying up all night, cramming junk food
and pounding coffee. Which is fun for the first few times. Then, at
least for me, it gets old. Maybe I'm just getting grumpy in my old
age, but sitting all night in a plastic chair, feeling progressively
worse from the lack of sleep, the caffeine and the junk food, just
doesn't sound great. And it doesn't really reflect the reality of
programming. Jobs (hopefully) don't require desperately programming on
little to no sleep in order to make a deadline.

But hey, don't let my grumpy old man kvetching stop you from enjoying
hackathons. They're truly fun, memorable experiences for a lot of
people.

Finally, there's conferences. Conferences are tricky cause they tend
to cost money to attend. Often lots of money. On occasion the
organizers will offer discounted or even free tickets to students. One
opportunity I had that I really appreciated was [Racket
School](https://summer-school.racket-lang.org/2018). I was able to
attend for free including my flight out and accommodation. I got to
learn about Racket and language oriented programming from the creators
of Racket. A very awesome opportunity for (basically) free.

# Clubs

NYU has quite a few CS clubs, Torch being one of
them. [Tech@NYU](https://techatnyu.org/),
[BUGS](https://bugs-nyu.github.io/) and
[ACM](https://cs.nyu.edu/acm/site/) are some other great clubs.

You should, of course, attend meetings at any/all of these clubs. More
importantly, you should get involved in running these clubs! Each and
every person I know who helps run the tech clubs at NYU wants more
people who can contribute. Whether it's figuring out the logistics of
room reservations or helping teach a workshop on front end
development, every bit is appreciated.


# Git

Learn git. This is a rehash of my CSO advice, but really it's
applicable to every single CS student. You can have a job that doesn't
use your data structures knowledge. You can have a job that doesn't
use Java or C or Python. You basically can't find a job that doesn't
use git[^3].

There's quite a few [great](https://try.github.io/)
[resources](https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials)
[online](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2) for git.

[^3]: Google is actually a very notable example. They use their own
    *shudder* proprietary system called Piper. If you've ever worked
    at a large tech company, you probably know why I'd shudder at the
    mention of proprietary internal tech.


