---
title:  "Be More Charitable"
date:   2020-09-04 20:00:00 -0700
---

We should all be more charitable. I've noticed that programmers can be
quite uncharitable---uncharitable towards other programmers,
uncharitable towards code, even towards companies. Code is always
unacceptably bad. Companies are incredibly stupid, have lost their
touch, and don't know what they're doing.

Let's try to do better.

Before making a claim, let's try to do our research, to ask our
questions and to learn the full story. Let's try to imagine a good
faith reason why this situation occured. Let's not fall back onto
[assuming
stupidity](https://horriblyunderqualified.com/posts/assuming-stupidity/)
too early. It's easy to blame. It's harder to understand.

# Credibility

One may ask: Why should I be charitable? The code is clearly bad and
the programmer should have done better.

Well, you could be wrong. Even at the worst companies, with the
dirtiest, ugliest codebases, there is code with valid
justification. And it doesn't matter if you were right 95% of the
time. If you call out code and are demonstrated wrong, your
credibility will suffer.

Now, in a perfect world that would not be a huge deal. People are
wrong and that's fine. The world goes on. But if you're in a place
that is not very reasonable, as many companies with bad code are, then
this is a big deal. You will be seen as the boy who cried wolf. Even
if your colleagues continue to listen to you, there will be that
nagging memory of the time you decried perfectly reasonable code.

Before committing to this claim, try to scope out the scene. Ask a
person who is familiar with the code. Make sure you understand the
technologies and the language. Make sure you understand the style and
conventions of the team.

Try to think of the most reasonable, in-good-faith, generous
justification for the code. Even bad code has reasons behind it.

Then, once you have done your research and asked your questions and
thought through the justifications, only then should you raise the
claim.

# Chesterton's Fence

You buy a piece of land and there is a fence on it. The fence has no
apparent purpose. It does not connect to anything, it does not appear
to do much.

What do you do?

Many would say to remove the fence. That is not the correct
answer. You should figure out the purpose of the fence. A use that is
not obvious is not the same as a use that doesn't exist.

# Nice

It's good to be nice. Being uncharitable is not nice. When someone is
uncharitable to me, I don't want to always explain gently why they're
mistaken. Sometimes I want to tell them to fuck off. That's not nice
either but I'm not perfect.

This won't lead to anything productive. It'll just lead to emotion and
anger and wasted time.

Even if people handle your lack of charity with more grace, it will
have an effect. They might be less eager to share work. They might not
tell you their ideas. They might withhold information for fear of your
reaction.

We all like to pretend that we're aloof adults with thick skin, but we
can still have our feelings hurt. It still stings to have someone
claim your code is bad.

# Ignorance

Ask yourself, do I know enough to make this claim? Or am I
unnecessarily confident in my ignorance?

# Making The Claim

Once you have decided to make the claim, do it with tact. Do not do it
in public.
