I mentioned in [my why not NYU CS
post](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/11/12/goto-nyu-cs-considered-harmful.html)
that I haven't been impressed with NYU's CS majors. I'd like to expand
on this. I don't want my conclusion to be simply that NYU CS majors
are subpar.

In many fields, there is a concept of root cause analysis. Root cause
analysis attempts to find the original sources of the problem. Often
times these sources are not obvious and obscured by blanket causes
like "human error". For instance, if a plane crashes due to human
error in filling the fuel, the root cause is not the human error, but
that there was no system to guard against human error in fueling the
plane.

Let's apply root cause analysis to crisis of quality in NYU CS. Why
are NYU CS students subpar?

# Admissions

What I assumed when I enrolled at NYU was that the really good people
were going to places like MIT, Berkeley, etc. Poor NYU wasn't high
enough in the rankings and was just getting everybody else.

A few things dissuaded me from that. For one, I met people from
schools ranked lower than NYU. Schools like Indiana University,
Northeastern, RPI, etc. If they were from schools ranked lower than
NYU, presumably they'd be worse, right? Nope. These students were
doing really cool stuff. They were working at top companies, doing
programming languages research, taking hard courses, etc.

Of course there's selection bias here. I met these people at
conferences and internships. I'm not meeting the mediocre students from
IU/NEU/RPI not in the room.

Still, even if these were the top of the top students, they were at
schools lower ranked than NYU. And at NYU they'd likely also be top of
the top.

Not to mention, NYU isn't that low ranked. It's pretty highly ranked
overall and its admission rate has been dropping super rapidly. If you
tell someone you go to NYU, generally they'll make some compliment
about how you must be smart.

So what gives? I don't have fully satisfactory answers, but here's a
couple conjectures.

First, most top CS students have probably been programming in high
school and know that they want to be a programmer. Since NYU isn't
known as a good CS school, good programmers are much more likely to
end up at places like RPI, UMich, Waterloo and so on. I know that
barring a few important extraordinary factors, I probably wouldn't be
at NYU. Almost every one of the top CS students at NYU that I know had
similar extraordinary factors.

Second, NYU isn't an automatic pick. Lemme clarify. Some schools,
often state ones, are automatic picks for high schoolers. If you're a
good programmer, you have decent but not stellar grades in high
school, and you live in Texas, where are you gonna apply? UT Austin!
Indiana? IU! Washington? UW! You see the pattern? Because NYU is a
private school and in a state with stellar public schools, we aren't
anybody's automatic pick.

Third, NYU is expensive. We're really really expensive. CS majors tend
to be numbers people. $70,000 is a very large number. Not to mention,
CS majors from Stanford to community college manage to make it into
Google. Why pay $70,000 a year to end up in the same place as the kid
who went to Stony Brook?

# Intellectual Ambition

I was going to write an entire post on this, but honestly it'd
probably be too bitter and jaded. I'll try to keep that at a minimum.

There's a thread here that underpins my complaints about NYU CS. At
one point I asked a few professors about why there were no honors
classes for CS. They responded that there used to be honors
classes---indeed some sections of courses are still unofficial honors
courses---but that they had to remove the designation because nobody
would take them.

If I had to give out a prize for most disappointing sentence in my
time at NYU, that'd be up there.

But actually it wasn't that disappointing, because I already kind of
knew that was the deal. Students at NYU lack what I'd call
intellectual ambition. They're plenty ambitious in other ways. They'll
talk your ear off about getting an internship or getting a 4.0. But
when it comes to learning CS topics on their own, the spark isn't
there.

Yes yes, this is all subjective to my experience. It's certainly
possible that there are plenty of students who are quietly working on
side projects who I don't know about.

That said, there's some indications. For one, the lack of Albert
replacements. Albert is a horendous piece of software. It's utterly
terrible and displays a level of malice towards the user that's almost
impressive. Anybody who interacts with Albert has at one point tossed
around the idea of building a replacement. I know I have. And yet,
there's only a handful of attempts. As far as I know, Schedge is the
only deployed, fully realized Albert replacement[^1]

[^1]: It's not a full replacement but still, it's pretty far.

If there was truly a bunch of talented programmers at NYU, we'd have
some sort of Albert replacement by now.

How can you tell if someone is intellectually ambitious? For me, it's
an unmistakable feeling when I talk to them that I need to up my own
game. I'll start talking to them and feel like a fire has been lit
underneath me. They'll be talking about their cool project or this
neat paper they read and the only thought in my head is "dammit I need
to get to their level".

Another sign is that they don't let school get in the way of their
education. They'll be procrastinating their OS homework by writing a
compiler. They'll kill time by learning this new web framework.

I've mentored a few groups of people and a common thread is that the
mentorship will break down because everybody's too busy with studying
and classes. Which yes, is the right set of priorities for
students. You should put your classes ahead of your extracurriculars.

But when I say that, when I'm nodding to some explanation about how
they can't make next week's meeting because they have midterms, I
can't help but feel like a coach who's repeating the stock line of
school first, sports second, all the while screaming in his head,
dammit, this isn't how you get good. Yes, you should put your grades
first. Yes, you should go study for that midterm. But dammit, this
isn't how you get good at programming.

Why the lack of intellectual ambition? I'm not sure on this either. I
do have a theory. Extrapolating from the admissions reasons, the type
of student that gets accepted to NYU is ambitious, but did not focus
on CS in high school. They're not someone who just picked a default
school, so they care about academics. This is a tricky demographic, as
this student cares about grades and classes but they're not in love
with programming. Perhaps they'll work on a project or attend a club
meeting, but they're fundamentally focused on the game that got them
into college and has brought them the most success: school.

Side note, these traits explain a lot of the academic participation
trophy posts like the [Case Against Double
Majors](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/05/15/the-case-against-double-majors.html),
[Masters Degrees: Are They Worth
It?](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/04/01/is-masters-worth-it.html),
and [Use Your
Runway](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/10/07/use-your-runway.html).

I'm aware that these generalizations are too harsh. Unfortunately when
you take traits from a large group of people, you end up distilling
the negative quite potently. Remember that these traits are embedded
in a far more complicated person, with nuances from their family,
background, education, etc.
