---
title:  "Notes On the Blogograph"
date:   2020-08-15 10:00:00 -0700
---


Happy Birthday Burn Rate! It's officially been one year since I wrote
the first post on this blog. What started out as a reddit comment on
how to survive CSO morphed into a post on my personal blog and then
this entire blog.

Over the course of the year I've written about a variety of topics,
from [doing side
projects](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2019/12/21/side-projects.html) to
[getting a big N
job](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2019/11/14/get-that-big-n-job.html) to
even [the
humanities](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/07/08/humanities-and-cs.html).

Since I purposefully didn't add analytics to my blog, I don't have any
numbers on how many people have read my blog. Frankly I'm fine with
that. I don't feel any obligation to grow my readership or cater to
anybody.

# What I've Learned

Over the course of this year (and 35 posts!), I've learned a few good
lessons on writing blog posts.

- If your intro or conclusion feels awkward or stilted, omit it. It's
completely fine to jump into the content and leave just as quickly.

- Remove as many filler words like "Okay but", "um", "so", etc. as
possible without sounding like a robot. It's more than you'd think.

- Or as Strunk and White espouse: Omit needless words.

- Keep track of words you use a lot and vary accordingly. Read the post
and note how many times you use "but", "also", etc.

- Don't keep saying that you think this or IMO that. This entire blog is
  your opinion. You don't need to repeat it.

- Any post that sits in your drafts for too long won't make it. Just
  kill it. Especially if it's too technical.

- It's okay to kill a post and revive it.

- If you're out of ideas for posts, talk with people and keep track of
your kvetches.

- Try to make posts shorter (still working on that!)

- Posts with any sort of technical details take easily twice as long.

- Just keep writing. Don't worry about superficial stuff like how the
blog looks or whether you should add comments, etc. [Dan
Luu](https://danluu.com/) is an extreme, but good example of content
over form.

- Edit edit edit. You need to read and reread the post. Be ruthless with
sentence structure and clarity. Delete entire swaths of text if necessary.

# Looking Ahead

I'm going to keep this blog going as long as I have post ideas. I've
definitely exhausted a lot of the obvious topics, but I do come up
with ideas here and there.

I've thought about expanding the formats of posts. Perhaps I can do
some interviews with people in CS. I'd also love to have some guest
posts. If you're interested in writing a guest post, please get [in
contact](https://nicholasyang.com/contact).

I'm taking this semester off to intern at Cloudflare, so I might find
some ideas there.

I've also started writing posts again on my personal blog, [Horribly
Underqualified](https://horriblyunderqualified.com/). The posts there
are slightly more technical and less related to NYU CS, but they may
still be of interest.

# Thank You

If you read this blog, thank you. I hope you enjoyed these posts and
that you were able to use them to improve your CS career.
