---
title:  "Stay Humble"
date:   2020-04-20 20:00:00 -0700
---

There's a lot of discussion inside the CS world about imposter
syndrome. For good reason. It's a topic that resonates with a lot of
programmers. We've all felt inadequate or unprepared compared to our
colleagues.

However there's a flip side to imposter syndrome: cockiness. It's not
quite as common but every programmer has certainly come across someone
who is cocky. Someone who claims that they can get stuff done very
quickly, who underestimates problems, who may claim that they
understand a topic which they don't. Maybe this person is you. I admit
that I can be a bit of a cocky programmer. I also put a lot of work
into not having this cockiness constantly on display. While a little
confidence is great for accomplishing tasks, cockiness can quickly
become condescending or rude.

You may be thinking at this point, "But wait! I'm not cocky. Why
should I read this post?" Well voices in my head, even if you may not
be cocky, there are plenty of programmers who are. Which can lead to
this common situation:

Sasha and Adrian are programmers working together on a project, say a
website in React. They're at approximately the same skill and
experience level. The only difference? Sasha is cocky while Adrian is
not. They decide to discuss the implementation plan for the site:

**Sasha** This project doesn't seem too bad. I know React, I'm good
at CSS and the requirements are super easy. We don't even have to
implement a mobile site! We can get this done in a week, easy.

**Adrian** *(thinking) Oh man, Sasha thinks we can get this done in a
week? I don't know...I've done a React project or two but I don't know
it. I have some background in HTML and CSS but I'm not an expert. Plus
there could be unforseen complications with the site. Sasha's
probably just really good at front-end.*

**Adrian** Ehh, I don't know man. A week is not a lot of time. I'd say
we should allocate three weeks.

**Sasha** Three weeks? That's a lot. C'mon, this is like my third
React project. I can teach you React if you need.


This may seem like an exaggerated conversation. I guarantee you it's
not. You can have two people with comparable skills and get two
completely different estimates for a project. It's why estimating
programming time is extremely difficult.

What this implies for those of us who are less cocky and more measured
in their self-estimates is that just because someone comes off the
better programmer doesn't mean they actually are. Just as the smartest
person in the room is not necessarily the person who speaks the
loudest, the person who is most confident may not be the most
competent.

How does one keep their cockiness in check? For one, try to listen and
adapt instead of dismissing. If Sasha had responded to Adrian's
concerns with:

**Sasha** Three weeks? That seems like a little long to me. Could we
go over how you arrived at that figure? I agree we could be a little
more cautious with our estimate.

Perhaps, upon hearing that, Adrian would feel less overwhelmed or
intimidated. It's important to open a dialogue with your fellow
students or colleagues, instead of conflict.

Another good route is to ask a question. Perhaps Sasha could have
started the meeting by asking Adrian what their plan is for
implementing the site. If I feel like I'm being too overbearing with a
developer, I try to find a way that I can learn from them. Every
programmer has good ideas or additions.
