---
title:  "The Karate Kid Is Bullshit"
date:   2020-10-08 20:00:00 -0700
---

The Karate Kid is a bullshit movie. It's about a kid who learns karate
from a mysterious sensei, trains for like 3 months and wins a
tournament against far better competitors. Anybody who's done a
competitive sport can tell you that's not how this works.

If The Karate Kid was a realistic movie, Daniel would start training
with Mr. Miyagi, go to a competition and get his ass kicked. Hell he'd
go to ten tournaments and get his ass kicked. He'd realize that to get
good, he needs to spar with people, specifically people who aren't his
70 year-old sensei. Different people have different styles. He'd
probably join Cobra Kai or at least another dojo with other students.

Daniel would also realize that winning a tournament isn't easy. It's
not a matter of winning against another team as much as winning over
30, maybe 40 people. Getting to the top means being in the top 2-3% of
karate practitioners. That takes time. Most people don't ever make it
that far. Daniel would need to train for at least a few years before
making it.

Wait, isn't this supposed to be a tech blog?

As it turns out, there's some similarities between The Karate Kid and
how people view tech recruiting[^1]. A lot of people are obsessed
about getting into FAANG/big N/unicorns. Hell, one of the [first
posts](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2019/11/14/get-that-big-n-job.html)
on this blog was about just that. I wrote it because I knew it would
catch people's attention.

[^1]: Well, that and I do legitimately think The Karate Kid is a dumb
    movie that teaches you the wrong ideas about sports.

All of these big N make up a few tiny percentage points of
developers. Google famously has a 0.2% acceptance rate, more
prestigious than any Ivy League.

Students obsess over these companies, yet the majority of students
start programming in college. They start with little to no programming
knowledge. And yet, they expect to get into the top 1% of developers
within what, 2-3 years?

When you put it that way, it sounds a lot more ridiculous. Granted,
there's some differences between programming and karate. Since a lot
of students start from zero, there's a more even playing field. There
are genuinely people who start programming in college and end up at
Google by junior year. But they're rare. They're the Daniel
LaRusso[^2]'s of tech. And even most of them don't go work at Google
as their first job. They intern at some small place then work up to
Google.

[^2]: That's the protagonist of The Karate Kid if you haven't seen
    it. Go watch it. It's a classic even if it sucks.

I definitely was not a Daniel LaRusso. I started programming when I
was 15. I interned at two places and programmed for five years before
I went to a big N. Lots of those years were spent reading about
programming, writing side projects, learning different languages,
etc. I didn't just walk in and end up in the top 1% of programmers. I
just happened to have a head start.

Taking the analogy a little further, if you want to get to the top 1%
of programmers, you should start sparring. No, I don't mean
competitive programming. I mean you should start seeing who you're
competing with. There's a lot of talented programmers out there. Start
seeing what they're doing, and try to catch up. I try to keep track of
good programmers around my age. I've actually started to reach out to
them, so that we can learn from each other.

Don't see them as competitors though. See them as benchmarks. If your
friend Ariel is writing a compiler, how about you try writing one? If
Justin is learning Rust, maybe you should too? I've had people
confidently tell me that they wanted to get a Google internship when
they could barely program. A little bit of GitHub stalking or resume
reading would show them the issues with that aspiration.

I don't want to rain on someone's parade. There's certainly a chance
you'll read a Facebook intern's resume and come away unimpressed. I
know people who undervalue their skills and could easily be Facebook
or Microsoft interns. And even if you're not skilled, all that means
is you need to train a little longer. Go make some side projects. Go
work at other places. Practice interviewing. There's no rush. The Big
N aren't going anywhere.

Of course you should apply to these companies regardless of your
experience. You have nothing to lose and everything to gain.

We love the idea of a wunderkind coming out of nowhere and stunning
people, but the truth is that barring a few exceptions, good
programmers are social beings. They learn from others, they engage in
technical communities and they share their knowledge.

Besides the big N shouldn't always be the goal. There's a lot of
issues with big N, which I went over in [my post about
them](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2019/11/14/get-that-big-n-job.html).

I know, working for Google or Facebook just sounds incredible. You're
getting paid all of this money, you get these ridiculous perks and a
resume boost that will help you for decades to come. But it's
important to recognize that this is a really difficult
accomplishment. Much as you probably won't win your first karate
tournament ever, you probably won't join Google as your first job.

Oh and don't get a mysterious Japanese man to mentor you in
programming. Unless his name is
[Matz](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yukihiro_Matsumoto).
