You probably shouldn't go to NYU CS.

I know, this is a pretty incendiary statement to make, especially
coming from a blog on improving NYU's CS community. But I figured it's
time to say it.

I've been seeing posts on the NYU subreddit from high school seniors
asking about NYU CS, about the shrinking acceptance rate, about
whether they should apply to Tandon or CAS. And while I should
probably answer their questions, I mostly want to respond asking them
why they want to go to NYU CS. There's not many good reasons and quite
a few bad ones. Let's debunk a few.

# Bad Reasons

## Ranking

For some reason people think NYU has a far better ranking than it
actually does. NYU is ranked 30th in computer science according to US
News. Perhaps it's because Courant is a well respected institution in
math and applied math, being ranked 9th and 1st accordingly.

In fairness, US News is a terrible blight upon higher
education. CSRankings.org, a slightly better site, puts NYU at
20th.

That's great and all, but it ultimately is pointless because rankings
do not matter in the slightest. People think it does, but ranking only
indicates the general quality of your professors as researchers. It
holds no bearing on the quality of the students or the quality of the
education.

There are obviously schools with high rankings that are good schools
for CS. Carnegie Mellon is top ranked and clearly an excellent school
for CS. But do not confuse correlation for causation.

## Location

I've made this claim mistakenly. New York is such a tech hub so it
must be so great for jobs! Yes and no. New York is a great place for
tech and there are more job opportunities. But you can apply to New
York jobs from anywhere in the world. NYU doesn't give you any boost
other than an offside chance your interviewer went here.

In fact a lot of the local companies that recruit from NYU are utterly
terrible. If you read the opportunities mailing list, you'll see a lot
of [startup
"internships"](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/05/27/startup-internship.html)
and low paid gruntwork.

There are great events like tech meetups and conferences, well at
least there were back when they existed. But realistically most
students don't go to them.

Y'know what most students do attend?  Student organizations! NYU
certainly has some student organizations who are doing great work. But
we're not the best at it. Other schools like Rutgers, UMich, UMD
College Park, RPI etc. have excellent student organizations that put
out great work.

# Why Not

## Curriculum

NYU's CS curriculum is remarkably weak. We don't teach a lot of
foundational subjects like compilers or databases. While there are
some professors who certainly teach rigorous, challenging courses,
there are plenty who don't. Indeed quite a few professors teach
courses that are a shadow of their counterparts at other schools. I've
seen data structures courses that neglect to cover hash table
implementation, algorithms courses that omit topics like seam carving,
compression and much more.

We don't offer enough practical courses either. We have no consistent
courses on functional programming, on principles of software
development, on systems programming.

Our intro courses are not cohesive, well designed paths towards
teaching students how to think, debug and program like computer
scientists, like at
[Northeastern](https://course.ccs.neu.edu/cs2500/index.html),
[Berkeley](https://www2.eecs.berkeley.edu/Courses/CS61A/) or
[Waterloo](https://cs.uwaterloo.ca/current/courses/course_descriptions/cDescr/newCDescr/CS115)
but poorly taught rote instruction on Java.

I've looked at a variety of schools, from Stony Brook to Indiana
University and they all have curricula with deeper requirements and
wider course options.

There's a few theories on why NYU's curriculum is so lacking, but
that's another post.

## Students

This might be my most contentious statement, but those who know me
will not be surprised. Truth be told, NYU's student body is lacking in
terms of programming ability and ambition. There simply are not enough
students who are capable, excellent programmers.

I came from a high school that was well regarded, even famous for its
CS program. What I loved about that CS program was there were people
who were scarily good at programming. They'd write graphics engines in
Haskell. They'd learn languages in days, build out codebases in weeks
and ship. As high school students.

NYU does not have enough of these people. There are certainly some
excellent programmers here, but truthfully I can't say there's more
than a dozen.

I don't mean to say that everybody needs to be a top programmer who
has been coding since they were 12. But having some of these people
around improves the CS program as a whole. They act as mentors, as
role models for other programmers. They can build out projects and
help with orgs like [Spark](http://spark.torchnyu.com/).

However this is actually an area where I'm optimistic. We don't have
enough of these people, but as NYU's ranking increases, as our
admission rates drop, we'll get more top programmers who see NYU as
their best option.

I'm aware there's some hypocrisy here. I'm declaring that NYU CS isn't
good, thus potentially driving away some of these top notch
programmers, thus keeping NYU CS not good. Not exactly improving NYU's
CS community. But it needs to be said.

## Jobs

NYU isn't a great place for job opportunities either. Don't get me
wrong, there's definitely people who get great jobs coming out of
NYU. I know people who've worked at Google, Facebook, Microsoft,
etc. But you're not gonna get a lot of help from NYU in that
process. There isn't a great recruiting scene here.

The people who get these great internships are also the outliers. Part
of the reason I started this blog was because I was stunned at how
many NYU CS students did not take their career seriously. They
wouldn't apply to internships, or they'd apply to 5 places and call it
quits. It really isn't their fault though. If NYU had a better career
culture, students would pick up on what needs to be done.

If I were to optimize my school choice for careers, I'd pick a school
with co-ops. Schools like Waterloo or Northeastern let students spend
part of their semester interning at a company. Students come out of
those schools with 3-4 great internships and a resume that makes them
look like a senior developer.

# Where Then?

If you're sufficiently convinced by my debbie downer arguments, you're
probably wondering where you should go to school. There's a few points
here.

If I were looking at schools ranked above NYU, I'd go to Waterloo,
CMU, MIT, Berkeley, UMich, Georgia Tech, UChicago, Princeton, Cornell,
Harvard, approximately in that order of preference.

Waterloo being first might be a surprise. It's not a school you hear a
lot about, let alone in the same breath as MIT. But it's truly a top
CS school with an excellent co-op program. They have an excellent CS
community with a veritable army of students attending every hackathon
in sight. You can find Waterloo students at every tech company
imaginable.

If I were looking at schools at or below NYU's ranking, I'd check out
Northeastern, Purdue, UT Austin, Stony Brook, Indiana University,
again, approximately in that order.

# Make The Best Of It

If you're at NYU and bummed out because of this post, sorry. I don't
mean to put you down. This post is the culmination of a few years
spent at NYU being disappointed at the CS program. That being said,
you can still make the best of NYU.

For instance, our math program is surprisingly good. I'd recommend
taking a couple classes if they interest you. The honors sequence is
challenging but rewarding.

Likewise we have a variety of amazing schools and departments covering
all sorts of interests. Want to watch and talk about films? Take a
Cinema Studies class. Want to draw and paint? Take a Studio Art
class. Want to learn from world class journalists? Take a journalism
class.

While most students don't take advantage of being in New York, you
should! Go to meetups when things go back to normal. Try networking
with people.

Grad classes are a great way to fill in gaps. I took graduate
compilers where we wrote a ChocoPy to RISC-V assembly compiler. Very
fun.

And of course, you can improve NYU CS! Join club leaderships. Write
blogs. Create projects. Talk to the administration about
improvements. We can make NYU a better school with enough effort and
time.
