The foundation of this blog is advice. Fundamentally I'm providing
advice about how to go through school, how to start your career, how
to become a professional programmer.

Some may wonder what makes me qualified to give advice. I'm not much
more experienced than my readers. However I see that as an
advantage. The world of tech recruiting is an extremely subjective,
ever-changing world. Someone who is 30 or went to a different school
will have a massively different experience. There's value in reading
the advice of someone close in age and education.

That said, the subjectivity of the tech world means that even my
experiences may be extremely different than yours. Nobody has the same
experience in tech. If you've read the posts on this blog, you've
likely read something that doesn't ring true or that contradicts your
knowledge and your history.

There's a myriad of factors that influenced my history. I'm an Asian
male, a classic demographic for programming. I grew up in a household
where I learned to program from a relatively early age. I had a parent
who could program and gave me guidance and connections. I went to a
high school that taught programming. I was able to take a gap year. I
could afford to not work while in school, giving me free time. I could
go on, but you get the point.

When I write, I try to avoid including advice that relies on these
factors. I never fully succeed. I'm aware that my advice relies on
assumptions like having free time or family contacts or a solid high
school education. I can never write about facing discrimination in
tech because that's never happened to me.

As far as I know, there are no other blogs devoted to the NYU CS
community. That's a shame. Many of my posts are highly opinionated,
such as [GOTO NYU CS Considered
Harmful](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/11/12/goto-nyu-cs-considered-harmful.html),
[The Case Against Double
Majors](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/05/15/the-case-against-double-majors.html),
[Humanities and
CS](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/07/08/humanities-and-cs.html). And
while I stand by these posts and their messages, I recognize that
they're not universally agreed upon.

I'd love alternative voices. If you're interested, please [contact
me](https://nicholasyang.com/contact). It'd be wonderful to have other
people contribute to this blog, or to promote other blogs.


And please, if you read this blog, beware of the single story. I'm not
the ultimate, unanimous guide to NYU CS. Seek out other students. Talk
to professors. And value your own experiences. They'll guide you
better than me.

P.S. The concept of a single story comes from [a TED
talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D9Ihs241zeg) by Chimamanda Ngozi
Adichie. I'd recommend watching it.
