* CS is not programming

Ah yes, the common line trotted out when people dare discuss learning
programming in a CS major. This isn't wrong, but it's often
disingenuous in spirit.

Programming is certainly not CS. However, the early parts of a CS
degree function as a introduction to programming. Furthermore, the
majority of CS majors are CS majors because they plan on programming
in their future career. Dismissing concerns about not learning enough
programming because "ItS NoT Cs" is just needlessly pedantic.

Furthermore, software development is a legitimate field of CS. People
like Barbara Liskov have contributed immensely to how we write
code. It's not unreasonable to study software development in a CS
program. Sure, software development as a research field isn't gonna be
React and JavaScript, but it will be principles like SOLID and DRY
which do show up in real world development.

* If you're good at math, do machine learning

This advice is everywhere. If you browse the various subreddits on CS
careers, you'll see people give it. I've even gotten it from some math
professors.

The problem, like a lot of the other entries, is that there's a
kernel[^1] of truth here. Machine learning research has a lot of
important math like topology, differential geometry and probability.

[^1]: But really it's a nullspace of truth

However, machine learning research is exceedingly not a common
path. It requires a PhD and the corresponding graduate level math
skills. The majority of machine learning jobs are much more in the
vein of data scientists and machine learning engineers. For these
jobs, the focus is much more on applying existing models to data. If
you go that route, you'll spend a lot of time cleaning data, finding
new datasets, and using statistical methods to verify your
results. This can be rewarding, interesting work, but it's certainly
not the pure, abstract elegance of math.

If you like the abstract logic of math, I'd check out programming
languages/compilers. Type theory is far closer to pure math than any
statistics. Plus pure functional programming like Haskell or OCaml is
very algebraic in nature. If you like algebra or category theory, then
you'll have a good time with either.

* Leetcode is required to get a job

I'm made it clear that I don't believe in Leetcode grinding. It
certainly can be a shortcut to getting a good job, but it's by no
means a requirement. Plenty of successful developers do well in
interviews without hundreds of Leetcode problems.

I'd focus on practicing problem solving, learning your fundamentals in
data structures and algorithms, and programming a lot. If you grow
your problem solving and technical ability, interviews should be a lot
easier.

* I should learn XYZ language/library/tool to be employable!

Often times students assume that companies hire by essentially pattern
matching. The company wants a React developer, so they filter out all
resumes that don't have React.

This does happen, but there's a few caveats. One, it's a stupid way to
hire junior developers. Really, it's a bad way to hire any developer
unless they're a contract programmer or a lead architect. Contract
programmers need to be productive in the short timespan they have and
can't waste time learning the stack. Lead architects should have the
requisite deep knowledge necessary to design a project from the ground
up.

The second is that most large companies are hiring for
everything. Google doesn't care if you know Python, JavaScript, Ruby
or Haskell. They're using all of them and more.

Learn what you think is neat. If you can gain a degree of depth in
whatever tech you like to use, then you'll be hireable.

