---
title:  "Humanities and CS"
date:   2020-05-31 20:00:00 -0700
---

I've written about a multitude of subjects on this blog. Mostly areas
that everybody kind of agrees are important. Maybe people will quibble
over a detail or two but nobody's disagreeing that you should get an
internship or work on a side project or two.

That ends today! I'm going to discuss an area that some may find
disagreeable. I'm going to discuss the humanities and why you should
learn them.

At NYU CAS we are required to get a liberal arts education. We take
classes on history (Cultures & Context), literature (Text & Ideas),
writing (Writing the Essay), art (Expressive Cultures), social
sciences (Societies and the Social Sciences), and foreign
languages. The ostensible purpose of these courses are to provide "a
foundational academic experience of general education in the liberal
arts for undergraduates".

I don't disagree with this sentiment. I'll expand shortly on why these
foundation is necessary. But before that, I'd like to emphasize:

> Studying the humanities is **NOT** equivalent to taking core classes

One common misunderstanding I see students making is taking the core
classes, finding them boring, then writing off all humanities.

The problem is that core classes are *hard to teach*. You're not
teaching a traditional major based intro class, so you can't spend too
much time on the basics, but you also can't jump into the more
advanced topics that are interesting because they require too much
technicalities.

If I had to teach a programming class where students came in with zero
experience, and would do zero programming after the fact, I'd find it
very very hard to make it interesting. It's an inherently daunting
task.

# Contextualization

Programming doesn't exist in a void. Each and every one of us, by
programming, is effecting change on the world. To quote Marc
Andreessen, software truly is eating the world. As programmers, we
hold immense power. Our code holds people's most private secrets. Our
models read their data and invade their privacy.

Humanities can give us insight into these issues. For instance the
concept of [surveillance
capitalism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Surveillance_capitalism),
created by Shoshana Zuboff, is a crucial concept behind companies such
as Google and Facebook. History can also provide insight. We can
analyze issues such as IBM's business with Nazi Germany, or the
ethical implications of the atomic bomb, and compare them to our
modern day issues.

I'm not saying you should forgo your job or take certain moral
stances, but it's good to have some awareness of how your work impacts
the world.

Behind every atrocity committed with technology, there was an
engineer. Maybe that engineer knew they were doing something
wrong. Maybe they didn't. Try to not be that engineer.

# Communication

Even though it's nice to imagine everybody communicates via ProtoBufs,
that's not reality. As I've outlined before, learning to [write a good
email](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2019/12/19/sent-from-my-iphone.html)
is extremely important. Likewise you'll need to write documentation,
articles, maybe even a paper or two.

The common response to this point is that technical writing doesn't
require reading James Baldwin. And yes, you could certainly restrict
yourself to reading solely technical literature. But you'd run into
two problems: most technical literature is rather poorly written and
rather boring. I guarantee that you'll have a better time reading
[Letter From A Region In My
Mind](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/1962/11/17/letter-from-a-region-in-my-mind)
than most technical literature. What you'll notice if you read the
piece I just linked (which you should read!) is the clarity of mind
which Baldwin infuses into his work. His prose is brilliantly
sharp---not a word wasted, not a careless thought. Not all good
writers are this way, but if you can take even an ounce of this skill
and infuse it into your writing, you'll be far better along than most
technical authors.

If you can infuse it into your programming, you will be among the best
programmers alive.

Another important quality is style. Even in technical writing, style
is crucial. Whether it's the rather idiosyncratic, pseudo-socratic
style of The Little Schemer, where Lisp is taught via a dialogue
between two people, or the mystical wisdom of the Tao of Programming,
style allows you to convey complicated ideas in charming or
interesting fashions.

Without the writing that I've read, I could not maintain this blog.

# Empathy

Empathy is often considered immutable: one either has empathy or does
not. I don't agree. Empathy is a quality that must be
exercised. Humanities provide you with a variety of ways to increase
your empathy such as watching films or reading fiction. Roger Ebert
famously said that films are the greatest empathy machine.

> Movies are the most powerful empathy machine in all the arts. When I
> go to a great movie I can live somebody else's life for a while. I
> can walk in somebody else's shoes. I can see what it feels like to
> be a member of a different gender, a different race, a different
> economic class, to live in a different time, to have a different
> belief

The flip side of empathy being mutable is that it's possible to lose
one's empathy. If you spend too much time debating yes-and-no, 1's and
0's, then you might begin to see the world in that lens. Which might
be great if you want to work on your
[Data](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_(Star_Trek)) impression, but
will make it harder to connect with people. There are plenty of issues
that are not just good/evil, yes/no.

Empathy is also profoundly important within programming. When I
analyze a piece of code, I try to put myself in the author's
shoes. Why did they write the code this way? What went wrong? What
went well? Did they have an outside factor affect their code?

Even bad code has good reasons behind it.

It's easy to dismiss code as bad, programmers as stupid. It's a lot
harder to work with said bad code and said stupid programmer to make
things better.

# Subjectivity

If there's one presque-universal sin of technical people, it's a
fetishization of objectivity. I can't count the amount of times I've
heard the slightly-condescending opening remark of "objectively...",
which inevitably is followed by some argument furthering a subjective
point.

I don't know why that is. Well actually I do. Objectivity is prized in
the sciences because one can be somewhat objective in science. However
once you stretch your view beyond the technical and start analyzing
the messiness of our world, objectivity quickly becomes impossible.

This is partially why some people dislike the humanities; you can't
prove sociology. Even I've wondered at times whether Goffman was
making it all up. But the answer isn't to reject humanities as a
whole. As the common refrain goes, all models are wrong, but some are
useful. Just because humanities lacks rigor, doesn't mean they're
without merit.

Subjectivity is a powerful concept to embrace. More of one's life is
subjective than a technical person would want to admit. Politics,
communication, even [our recounting of
events](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rashomon)---all of these are
subjective. The mistake that some make when they do not have a
humanities education is this subjectivity is sourced from people's
stupidity. That if people just sat down and thought logically, we'd
have objective answers to these issues. Unfortunately that's not
true. More often than not, the "objective answers" which the person
wants us to reach are colored by their own biases and subjective
experiences.

Laying claim to objectivity will not give you such; it will simply
blind you to your subjectivity.

Why does one need this in computer science? As much as we claim to be
on the side of objectivity, as much as we use terms like "science" and
"engineering", programming is an incredibly subjective practice. There
isn't one way to write good code. There isn't one perfect programming
language. We don't have the best way to design a system.

Too many times when we encounter these nuances, these subjectivities,
we try to lay claim to objectivity. We try to make statements like
"objectively...Docker is the best way to deploy". When really we mean
"subjectively, when I deploy, I feel like Docker is the best way to do
it".

# You Already Study Humanities

This may come as a shock, but as a person living in the world, you are
a student of the humanities. When you watch a movie with friends and
discuss it afterwards, you are studying the humanities. When you
discuss politics, you are studying the humanities. When you listen to
music or read a book or talk with a friend about coronavirus, you are
engaging in society and therefore the humanities.

"Cool", you say, "I don't have to take a class because I'm already
doing humanities!" Well not so fast. Humanities courses allow you to
take this knowledge that you've been building up in your life and
harness it. Whether it's an ability to contextualize your life
experiences with a broader narrative (sociology), understand how
previous events have contributed to your experiences---or how our
understanding of previous experiences reflects the present (history),
or how to understand your existence as a whole (philosophy), the
humanities are tools at your disposal.

Why are these tools important? So much of the world is utterly
mystifying. Politics and ideologies and philosophies attempt to
explain these mysteries, but without proper tools, you can't provide a
critical eye towards them. You're simply accepting your beliefs as
faith.

It's quite easy to come up with misleading statements that without
training, can lead you towards questionable conclusions. Humanities
provide the tools to untangle these statements and understand their
nuances.

# Technical Humanities

One problem I've noticed with technical people and humanities is that
the technical person will take a humanities subject that is
purportedly more scientific, subjects such as linguistics. These
subjects can certainly be extremely useful. But they can also provide
a poor perception of humanities as a whole.

When one takes a subject like linguistics, one encounters many ideas
and techniques that may seem almost scientific. Context free grammars,
for instance, show up in linguistics and computer science. This
similarity creates a temptation to apply a level of rigor to the
subject.

This will usually end in disappointment. Not only is rigor impractical
even in technical humanities, but the professor is highly unlikely to
be proficient in rigorous arguments. The technical student will probe
and argue with rigor and the professor will not provide rigorous
arguments in response. The student may take that as a sign that they
have "won" and shown that the subject is nonsense. In truth, they are
just speaking a different language.

A common instance of this is that a professor will make a claim. The
student will think for a bit and provide a counter-example. The
professor might accept the counter-example but note that it is an
exception. After all in a humanities subject, claims do not have to be
universally true. Most universally true claims in humanities are
rather vacuous. The student will not care, as after all in math a
single counter-example disproves a claim.

When taking a humanities course, it is paramount that one does not try
to apply the same technical analysis---mutch as one shouldn't rigorously
analyze the time travel mechanics of The Terminator.

This may be hard, as many technical people have this rigorous analysis
bound tight into their persona. They believe that their powers of
logic and reason are what make them smart and different. In many
regards they are right. But it does not pay to analyze everything
through a logical lens. Pejoratively, nobody likes a know-it-all.

To prevent this temptation, I would recommend taking humanities
courses that do not approach the technical. It's a lot less tempting
to take a logical, rigorous approach to film than linguistics.

# I've Learned Enough

When I've made these arguments to my friends, they've acknowledged
that humanities are useful. It's quite hard to make the claim that
humanities are absolutely devoid of merit. They then go on to make the
claim that there is a limit to which one should learn humanities and
they have reached that limit.

I disagree that there is a limit for humanities. The humanities are a
reflection of the world and the people within it. As humanity changes,
so do the humanities. The [Overton
window](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Overton_window) shifts. Ever
wonder how certain old people stay rooted in their outdated beliefs?
They stopped learning. The times are always a-changing and if you
don't start swimming, you'll sink like a stone.

