---
title:  "What's Missing"
date:   2020-08-06 10:00:00 -0700
---

I wrote a post talking about the topics [you should
know](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/05/31/stuff-you-should-know.html). In
the process of writing that post, I realized there were a lot of
topics I'd like to put on the list, but couldn't. My criterion for
inclusion in the list was that the topic needed to be taught in some
shape or form by an NYU CS course, ideally a core one. If one
professor taught the topic but not others? Fine. But it needed to be
something that an NYU student could have conceivably stumbled upon. In
the spirit of kvetching about NYU, here's some of these topics I wish
NYU taught.

# Programming Languages

Anybody who knows me personally is probably rolling their eyes. I
happen to be rather interested in PL, having written [my own
programming language](https://github.com/nicholaslyang/saber). Until
recently I had accepted that my interest was just a niche area that
not everybody needed to know.

What changed? Well I started working on a project to compare CS
curricula (more on that in another post). As I trawled through the
various requirements and course offers, I began to realize
something. Hey, programming languages is a pretty damn common
requirement!

There's good reasons for this. For one, programming languages is a
foundational pillar of CS. There's debate about the exact pillars, but
I'd say it goes: Systems, Theoretical CS, Programming Languages,
Artificial Intelligence and Software Engineering. Maybe Human-Computer
Interaction too.

Every programmer interacts with a programming language. No
matter what company, no matter if it's front end, back end or
middleware, you're dealing with a compiler or interpreter if you're
writing code.

What is programming languages? Programming languages is the general
study of the languages you use to write code. This can mean
implementations such as compilers or interpreters. This can mean
theoretical topics such as type theory, formal methods for proving
correctness or program analysis. This can mean different paradigms of
programming languages such as functional, logical or imperative.

Programming languages has ties to many other areas in CS. You'll need
to know some systems development to work with compilers that generate
assembly. You'll need to know some theoretical CS to analyze your PL
algorithms (cf [Swift Typechecking is
Undecidable](https://forums.swift.org/t/swift-type-checking-is-undecidable/39024)). You'll
need to know some software engineering to write a compiler and design
an effective language. You might even need some machine learning
knowledge if you're writing the [right sort of
compiler](https://www.tensorflow.org/swift).

If you want to learn more about programming languages, I'd recommend
the following resources:

- [Crafting Interpreters](http://www.craftinginterpreters.com/) is a wonderful book on how to write an
  interpreter for a language. It teaches from the ground up. All you
  need is some Java experience.

- [Beautiful Racket](https://beautifulracket.com/) is a great intro to
  creating mini programming languages to solve your problems.

- [Learn You A Haskell](http://learnyouahaskell.com/) is an often
  recommended book to learn Haskell. Some people aren't a fan, but
  hey, it's free.

- [Lambda Calculus](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eis11j_iGMs) is a
  fundamental concept in PL. Computerphile has a great video on it.

# Networks, Databases
