---
title:  "Into The Interview"
date:   2020-08-01 20:00:00 -0700
---

I've talked about interviews
[in](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/05/21/chill-on-leetcode.html)
[previous](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2019/11/14/get-that-big-n-job.html)
[posts](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/01/02/first-job.html). However
some recent experiences helping others with interview prep has given
me some more insight. Here's a couple tips on how to prep and handle
an interview.

# Practice The Real Deal

A lot of people recommend practicing Leetcode for technical
interviewing. I've already talked about how [I'm not a huge
fan](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/05/21/chill-on-leetcode.html). My
main argument is that Leetcode doesn't practice the most important
part: communicating your problem with your interviewer. For that, you
need to practice with someone.

I recently read [Do The Real
Thing](https://www.scotthyoung.com/blog/2020/05/04/do-the-real-thing/),
a wonderful blog post. It argues that people spend a lot of time not
doing the actual activity, instead opting to do fake
alternatives.

With interviewing, this is definitely true. You should be practicing
interviews in as close to a real environment as possible. You should
have a friend play the role of an interviewer. They should not joke
around with you, at least not as much as normally. They should ask you
both the technical and interpersonal questions that you get in a
standard interview. Ideally this friend should have actual experience
interviewing. That way they can accurately mimick a technical
interview.

The interview should follow a standard format. The interviewer looks
at your resume; they ask you about various entries in your resume; you
respond. Ideally these entries should be in areas the interviewer
doesn't already know about. If there's a project I've collaborated on,
I won't ask about it. This part should take at least 5-10 minutes.

Next up is the technical question. The best technical question is one
that the interviewer has been asked themselves. They know it's a valid
question and they can assess solutions. Oh yeah, interviewers should
**always** know the answer to the question themselves.

The question should be done on either a CoderPad, a Google Doc, or a
whiteboard. No IDEs allowed. I prefer Google Doc because it's
inconvenient and very common.

There should be a reasonable time limit to the interview, say 45
minutes. If you can't solve the problem within that time limit, tough
luck.

# Mental Game

I used to fence competitively. I was never amazing, but I did learn
how to handle competition stress. Well, somewhat.

Interviews are similar. They're an event with a high risk/reward and
lots of pressure to perform. Almost everybody I know gets nervous with
interviews. You get nervous, I get nervous, we all get nervous. You
need a proper mental game to work through the nervousness and succeed.

Everybody has a different mental game. Some people listen to music to
hype them up. Others prefer silence or even nature noises. Maybe you
should warm up with a practice question. Maybe you take a break from
programming for the day before the interview.

Physical wellbeing also matters. You can't perform if you're sleepy or
feeling bad. Try to get as much sleep as possible. If you drink
coffee, make sure to have one before the interview (but not so much
that you're antsy). Consider stretching or getting exercise before the
interview. I care a lot about diet too. I don't like eating anything
too meat or carb heavy before an interview. I also avoid anything
gluten or dairy based. That's just my quirks.

If you have trouble sleeping, go do something physically strenuous the
day before. A good hike or bike ride will help you sleep like a baby.

Self talk is a great technique as well. Telling yourself that you can
do it works remarkable wonders. Sometimes we forget that programming
is a psychological task as much as a technical one. If you believe
that you can solve the problem, you're more likely to get a
solution. Sometimes when I'm nervous, I acknowledge that I'm nervous
and tell myself it'll be alright. There's always another company,
another open position.

Meditation is a wonderful way to calm oneself down. If you find
yourself nervous, focusing on your breathing can calm you down and
center you.

When you're at the interview, try to act confident, even if you
aren't. Smile a lot, speak up, and if you're in a magical time or
place where you can have physical contact, shake their hand
firmly. You can fool yourself into being more relaxed than you
actually are.

# Do Your Homework

Before the interview, do your homework. Read about the company. Figure
out their history, their culture, their potential future. You should
have a good argument for why you want to join this company and why
you're a good fit. For instance if you're applying to a company whose
motto is ["move fast and break
things"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Facebook,_Inc.#History), then
maybe you should emphasize your ability to learn new tech and ship
stuff quickly. If you're applying to a company that is known for [S C
A L A B I L I T
Y](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2018/12/10/the-friendship-that-made-google-huge),
maybe talk about your interest in performance and building scalable
systems. Of course this should be based in at least a kernel of truth,
so if you truly have no interest in scalability, then don't talk about
it. If you can't back it up with your resume or with some discussion
point, then don't mention it.

If you know your interviewer ahead of time, research them. Are they
young? Are they older? What's their area of interest? This can
determine how you talk to them. If I'm talking to someone who's been
experimenting with new technologies and likes Rust, well cool! I like
Rust and can talk about that. If I'm talking with someone who's been
in the industry for 20 years, is an expert in C# and doesn't appear to
be that into newer tech, then maybe I won't talk about Rust. Maybe
I'll talk about learning software design patterns and developing my
OOP knowledge.

# Clarify The Question

Alright, you've gotten past the personal talk and you've moved on to
the technical question. The interviewer will drop into the
CoderPad/whatever and give the question.

At this point, you should start thinking of as many clarifications as
possible. What are valid inputs? What happens with this edgecase? How
should you handle errors?

It's definitely okay to propose an input and ask what the
corresponding output should be.

I like to enumerate possible tricky points, just to see if the
interviewer contradicts me. Maybe something like "Oh well I'll have to
handle the case where these integers are negative". Often times the
interviewer will chime in that I actually don't, which is great since
it makes my life easier.

Not only will this help you get the best possible chance at this
problem, it demonstrates that you understand the question and are
willing to gather requirements. A profoundly important step in
programming is accurately assessing and clarifying the problem. You'd
be amazed at the amount of programmers who start coding without this
step.

# Start Writing!

Then, once you've gathered enough info to produce the simplest,
stupidest possible solution, start writing code! Don't try to explain
your solution to the interviewer. Just get to work.

Write in a language that you're comfortable. This can depend on the
problem. If the interviewer asks me to choose a language before they
give the question, I usually politely respond that I'd prefer to
choose after I see the problem. They always let me.

I've used some unconventional languages before, like Haskell or
Rust. I've done it when the language has been on my mind, i.e. I've
been using it recently, and when the problem is suited to the
language. I won't do a complicated data structures program in Rust
cause lifetimes will bite me, but I might do a simple array problem in
it.

Don't try to do anything too crazy in the first solution. It should
just get the problem done.

If you can't figure out a solution, start talking about why you're
having trouble. Your interviewer is there to help you and they can't
help you if you're silent.

# Hints & Help

Your interviewer will probably drop some hints or help during the
interview. Listen to these carefully. Often times they're to prevent
you from barking up the wrong tree, or to help fix a glaring
issue. They're not trying to trick you.

If you don't understand the hint, you can ask them to clarify.

# Debugging

Once you produce a solution, you'll have to debug it. If you can write
bug free code without a compiler in a Google Doc, then congrats, you
deserve the job. For the rest of us mortals, there be bugs.

This can be tricky since you often can't execute code. Pick simple
tests and manually trace through them. Try to account for the
edgecases like empty strings, null or empty arrays.

Take your time with this. It's definitely okay to stare at the board
for a bit here.

# Complexity && Improvements

At this point your interviewer will ask for you to estimate the space
and time complexity of your solution. They'll ask for it in big-O
notation (although tbh big theta is more what they want). This
estimation doesn't have to be rigorous. Often it's just counting
loops/how many times you visit an element.

Your interviewer will then ask you for some improvements, either in
space or time complexity. This is where you'll need to get creative.

If you need to speed up time complexity, consider adding a hash
table. Often times if you're doing a search inside a loop, that's an
O(n) operation inside another O(n) operation, aka an O(n^2) operation
in total. If you can loop through and add to a hash table, your search
becomes O(1) making your total complexity O(n).

Likewise if you need to reduce space, you can sort an array and use a
binary search instead of dumping into a hash table. That'll be O(n log
n).

Can you cache with other data structures? I had a question where the
solution involved bitmaps as sets.

Can you do the operation in place? If you're rotating a matrix, you
can rotate by creating a new matrix and copying entry by entry, or you
can rotate rings.

Remember that you're always optimizing for the worst case and the
slowest algorithm. It doesn't matter if your code runs faster for
optimal inputs. It doesn't matter if you turned your O(n log n)
algorithm into O(n) if it's immediately followed by an O(n^2) algorithm.

# Keep It Simple

It's quite rare that you'll need to use anything fancy. The fanciest
data structure I've had to use was a heap or a bitmap. Most likely you
won't go beyond arrays, linked lists, graphs or binary trees.

Don't even bother with something like a red/black tree. Your
interviewer will most likely not know how to verify a red/black tree.

# Any Questions?

Often times the interview will have a portion where you can ask
questions. If you've done your homework, you should have some
questions. That being said, it's totally okay if you don't. Especially
if you've already done multiple interviews, it's quite likely your
questions have already been answered by a previous interviewer. Also
sometimes my brain is just too fried to come up with questions.

# After The Interview

Once you're done with the interview, go relax! Often I treat myself to
a nice meal.

As for results, try to have zero expectations. I've gotten jobs when I
thought I did badly and I've gotten rejected when I thought I did
well. If you can keep your head up and keep applying, you'll get
better at interviewing and definitely get some offers.
