---
title:  "Evolve, don't transplant"
date:   2020-07-19 20:00:00 -0700
---

Let's face it. Fall 2020 will be online. There is no part of the
United States that is safe enough for 20 people to congregate
indoors. That will not change by September. Even if your university
against all logic or reason reopens. Even if they manage to convince a
professor to teach a class in person, i.e. spend at least an hour in a
room with multiple potential covid-carriers. Even if you enroll in
said class. Even if [science doesn't get in the
way](https://www.washingtonpost.com/video/politics/mcenany-on-school-reopenings-the-science-should-not-stand-in-the-way-of-this/2020/07/16/37364336-77d1-4cae-877c-8442cc79d810_video.html). Even
then, every class will have to be partially online.

How, then, are professors supposed to teach? That is the billion
dollar question. That is the question professors and universities are
scrambling to answer.

I can't claim to give an answer. But I have a plea. Professors,
schools, students:

> Evolve, don't transplant

What do I mean by that? I mean that we should not be satisfied with
taking an in person class and simply transplanting it online. We
should take the active effort to evolve our course into digitally
native experience.

This past spring, professors reacted similarly to the shift
online; they took the exact format of their in person classes and
simply adapted it to the new online format. In person lectures became
online lectures. Tests became online tests. Presentations became Zoom
presentations. At the time, that was more than adequate. Considering
the limited timeframe and the intensely stressful situation,
professors were able to move with remarkable agility.

Fall is different. Most courses will never meet in person. The
incoming class of freshmen will never have stepped foot into a
university classroom. Classmates will not meet physically.

This is a daunting task. But it also offers an opportunity. The shift
from physical to digital represents a medium change. In any medium
change, whether from radio to film, from film to television, etc.,
there are changes in form. It does not suffice to take a radio show
and transplant it to film. One must evolve their form so that it is film
native, so that it takes full advantage of what film offers.

The same must be true of the move online. Professors should reflect on
their courses and determine which elements are remnants of the
physical and which are transportable to the digital.

Does a 1.5 hour lecture still make sense? Lecture lengths are
constrained by building space, by student availability and by
commutes. None of those apply anymore. Perhaps multiple 45 minute
recorded lectures would work better? Or maybe short bursts of 5 to 15
minutes? All of this is within reach now.

Are tests still worth doing when students are in multiple timezones
and at a computer where they can easily search the answer? What
happens if their internet goes out? What if the submission site
crashes?

Of course these questions will depend on your situation. But they are
now yours to ask.

Some may respond that this is far too much to put on our poor
educators. Isn't it enough for them to teach in these trying times?
Let alone completely rework a course to be online.

However evolution does not mean more work. I have already seen many
professors run ragged attempting to develop a "fair" testing
environment. No such thing exists. It would do them a lot more good to
accept that testing is the way of the physical and they must find an
alternative that is the way of the digital.

Likewise professors may realize that recording 45 minute lectures
works a lot better when also taking care of a young child. They may
realize that a tablet can do far more than a whiteboard. They may be
able to pull in other professors or other resources from across the
globe.

Change is daunting, especially now. But we must embrace it.
