I have a problem with the phrase "self taught programmer". It's not
that I take issue with autodidacts. Far from it, I find the phrase
redundant. Every programmmer is a self taught programmer.

Sure, some of us take courses in school and maybe learn to write code
with the guidance of [a brilliant, iconoclastic
professor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matthias_Felleisen). But the
nice guided path of professors never lasts. Eventually, whether for
work or for personal interest, you end up having to teach yourself.

To an extent this is true with all fields. Laws change; medicine
evolves; engineering techniques improve. But programming is unique in
a few ways. For instance, it's unique in the speed and intensity of
its evolution. New libraries, new languages, new paradigms seem to pop
up every week. Programming is also a field where you are not taught
the precise skills necessary to be a programmer in school. Most CS
students graduate, for better or for worse, as fairly incompetent
developers. This isn't their fault. Schools simply don't teach
software development workflows, agile, deployment techniques, software
architecture, visual design, object oriented patterns, etc.

At some point in your development career, you will have to teach
yourself. The earlier you accept that, the better you will do. On the
flip side, if you don't like teaching yourself, then you will not have
a great time as a programmer.

I've repeated again and again and again that courses aren't enough at
NYU. I've said this because yes, NYU does have lackluster CS courses,
but even at a school with the best, most comprehensive curriculum,
this would still be true. You will not learn enough in school.

Some may respond that I'm merely a youngster echoing a sentiment
specific to web development, an area bursting with other young,
overeager programmers. I'll concede that web development does have an
unusually high rate of churn and that not all areas of programming
necessarily require you to perpetually teach yourself. But even the
most stagnant of the stagnant require some self teaching. Even if you
decide to learn COBOL and spend your life maintaining 50 year old
codebases, you'll still have to teach yourself COBOL! I'm pretty sure
NYU doesn't offer a class in it.
