---
title:  "Technical Mentorship: Non-Negotiable"
date:   2020-05-19 20:00:00 -0700
---

What's the one thing you should care about when looking for an
internship? Is it the tech stack? The salary? The free snacks?

Nope. It's the **technical mentorship**. Unless there's a person at
the company who can be your technical mentor, **don't work there**.

I've had the same conversation with some friends where I ask them
about their job. It goes something like this:

Me: Oh hey where are you working?

Them: This startup/company that does xyz. I'm building them a web app
in React^[1] and TypeScript.

Me: Huh, okay. Is there someone who you could learn from there?

Them: Not really...the company mostly uses contracted developers.

Me: That's not good. Is there a CTO or lead developer.

Them: Nope

[1]: Startups loooove React.

That's not a good sign. Usually this friend is getting underpaid as
well. Before I'd try to convince them on the merits of the idea being
bad and the pay being bad. But that doesn't matter. Startup ideas are
hard to judge and making a little less money isn't a huge deal---25
bucks an hour is a pittance by developer standards but a solid wage
for a student. The real problem is that my friend isn't getting
mentorship.

Somewhere along the line, internships have gone from a technical
mentorship to what's basically a temporary junior junior developer
position. Of course this change is partially due to interns getting
paid---companies don't want to pay interns only to teach them. But
it's made it harder and harder to find the most important experience a
young developer can have: working with and learning from a proper
technical mentor.

I was lucky enough to find a proper mentor. My first internship was
way back in the summer after high school. I had graduated and was
lucky enough to find an internship via family contacts^[2]. This
internship was at a hedge fund doing Ruby and C++.

[2]: Extremely common. If you haven't, ask your family about any contacts they may have.

What I loved about this internship was how emphatic they were that
they were teaching me. This was especially nice of them since I was a
relatively unexperienced high school student. I had spent the last
summer doing some basic research writing MATLAB and Java but other
than that I didn't have much technical experience.

One important note, this internship was unpaid. Well they started
paying me towards the end because I was producing useful work. I'm not
sure I'd recommend doing unpaid internships in general. This was a
very rare situation where the unpaid internship obeyed the legal
requirements of being solely educational. The moment it became
beneficial for the company, they paid me. I also recognize that I was
in a fortunate enough situation to take an unpaid internship.

The internship started with lead developer and CTO walking me through
a project. They took time out of their day to teach me about various
technologies like SQL, Ruby, etc. They would devote time to code
reviewing and explain to me how my code could be improved. There was
no pressure to push features out the door or finish the project
ASAP. The lessons they taught me there were absolutely valuable and
have served me well in every future job, more than any amount of money
or prestige.

Before that internship, I had some technical skills, but I didn't know
the craft of programming. I didn't know how to think about error
handling (propagate vs panic vs handle). I didn't know how to pick the
right tool for the job---or debate it with my team. I didn't know how
to defend my code in code review---or write code that was defensible
in the first place. But that's par for the course for many college
students, let alone high schoolers.

Why is that? Because it's hard to learn these skills. Colleges don't
teach it; most professors don't have experience programming
professionally. There's certainly books and blogs and talks that you
could watch which explain some of these ideas. However that's tricky
because media about the craft of programming is fundamentally someone
else *telling* you that this technique or this idea works. You have to
take someone at their word that this methodology is actually
effective.

Working with a mentor, while certainly subjective in many ways, lets
you see first hand whether or not something works. Your mentor can
talk your ear off about agile, but it's up to you whether you find
agile useful or not.

Don't get me wrong---consuming media on the craft of programming is
one of the best ways to improve your skills. But you need to balance
it out with actual experience, ideally with a mentor.

# What Should I Do?

Okay but how does that translate to you, a student who just wants a
job? In a gist, seek out technical mentorship. Don't just take a job
because it pays. Whenever you look at a company, ask yourself what you
can learn from them. Or don't ask yourself---ask them. Ask them about
their mentorship programs. Any company running a halfway decent
internship program should pair interns up with mentors or offer some
sort of training program.

Make sure the company has good enough technical standards that you can
learn from them and not vice versa. Ask them questions from the [Joel
Test](https://www.joelonsoftware.com/2000/08/09/the-joel-test-12-steps-to-better-code/). Ask
them about their code review process. Get insight into how they think about software.

Avoid at all costs jobs where you don't have a boss who is
technical. Don't kid yourself into thinking that you're talented
enough to not need the supervision. Especially avoid places that rely
on contracted programmers. Even if one of the contracted programmers
is a good mentor, they'll be on to the next job before you know
it. Besides those places tend to have less than stellar tech.

Also avoid places that just put interns on bug duty, i.e. have them
tackle the endless JIRA backlog without any training or overarching
goal. It's demoralizing and not educational.

Constantly seek out technical mentorship. For my most recent
internship at Microsoft, I actively emailed a bunch of developers
working in my field of interest, programming languages and
compilers. Even though I was getting legitimately wonderful technical
mentorship from my manager and mentor, I still wanted to maximize the
amount of knowledge I could get from Microsoft.

If you find a mentor who you like, keep in touch with them. Maybe buy
them a gift. A good technical mentor is worth a lot.
