---
title:  "Use Your Runway"
date:   2020-08-25 20:00:00 -0700
---

I've been working on [Spark](https://spark.torchnyu.com/), Torch's
mentorship program, where I've been fortunate enough to meet the next
generation of precocious NYU CS students. With a few of these
students, they've mentioned the standard ambitious plans such as
[double
majors](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/05/15/the-case-against-double-majors.html),
[masters
degrees](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/04/01/is-masters-worth-it.html),
and graduating early. I've tackled the first two, so why not the last?

Graduating early is a very understandable plan. College is
expensive---skipping a year could save you a massive chunk of
cash. And if you're truly set on it, then go ahead. However there's
some caveats.

# Shorter Runway

I like to visualize college as a runway. It's an opportunity to learn
what you want, meet who you want and generally do what you want to
best prepare yourself for your adult life. You should come out of
college with some momentum and a plan.

If you choose to graduate in three years, then you're effectively
cutting your runway short. This means that whatever you want to
accomplish, social, professional or otherwise, needs to pushed
up. Want two internships before graduating? Better start looking
freshman year. Want to apply to grad school? You'll need to look at
research opportunities as early as possible.

# School != Classes

One mistake that some people make is assuming that all they need is
the degree. They decide to speed run college, get the degree and get
out. For some majors that very well may be a decent solution, but for
CS that's not ideal. I'd argue that internships and practical
experience are equally important as classes. I've met my fair share of
people who have graduated without work experience and struggled to
find jobs post-grad.

To graduate in three years, you generally need to give something
up. You'll need to take more CS classes than normal, or you'll need to
take classes over break. This can cut into your precious
internship/extracurricular time. If you find yourself deciding between
graduating early and taking an internship, I'd take the internship.

# Learn More Than The Major

Another issue I take with graduating early is that it usually prevents
taking non-CS, non-core classes. I've written about the [joy of
humanities](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/07/08/humanities-and-cs.html)
before, but even if you're genuinely a whole hearted STEM person,
there's a whole bunch of cool classes you could take. I've talked
about how I'm against double majors, but that doesn't mean I'm against
learning various subjects. You could take some data science courses,
or some graduate CS courses. You could learn some math or some
physics. Frankly NYU's CS major is not that rigorous, so graduating
with the bare minimum won't give you a lot.

# Meeting People

A big big part of college is meeting people, both socially and
professionally. NYU is a school with a talented student body in a
variety of fields. I'd recommend doing your best, even during
coronavirus, to meet people and develop connections. Networking gets a
bad rap, but it does pay to know really smart, really interesting
people. You can get referrals, career advice, even potential partners
if you want to do a startup or other venture.


# The Right Reasons

One theme that I've touched upon in other posts is the idea of
credentialism. A lot of students tend to judge themselves through
accomplishments like getting a masters degree, doing a double major,
graduating in three years. This is sort of understandable as
credentialism is the name of the game for college admissions. Being
president of five clubs while taking 10 APs does genuinely help your
college applications. But the same isn't true in college. Sure,
projects and past jobs will help you get internships, but nobody cares
if you graduate in three years. At best, it'll get you to the
interview, at which point you'll be like anybody else. Same with a
masters degree and same with a double major.

None of these things are inherently bad, but make sure you're doing
them because of genuine reasons. Not due to credentialism, not due to
ego and certainly not due to autopilot.

# Mental Health

As with any ambitious academic pursuit, graduating in three years can
strain your mental health. You'll likely have to take 20 credits a
semester, likely all mandatory, challenging classes. You'll probably
have less time to socialize and have fun. Is it worth it?  Probably
not. Your mental health is worth more than the saved tuition or the
credential.

Some of you may not be used to thinking about your mental health. I
know that my high school had a culture of ignoring mental health for
the sake of getting ahead. You should understand that this is not
sustainable. Eventually, sometime, somewhere, your mental health will
catch up to you. And all that you've worked for will be pointless if
you're miserable.

Not to mention mental health is a pragmatic concern. If you do face
mental health issues such as burn out, depression, etc., you might
find yourself in danger of withdrawing from school or having to do
another semester. This isn't the end of the world---your mental health
is more important than school---but it does make the cost/benefit
analysis a little trickier.

I remember warning a younger classmate from my high school about
mental health, and he responded that he just thrives in high pressure
environments. And coming out of high school, I can see why he'd
believe that. He survived an intense school, with extreme amounts of
work and managed to gain acceptance into a prestigious college. He
could very well be the rare breed of person to thrive in high pressure
environments.

But what if he's wrong? What happens then? Most likely he'll burn
out. Perhaps it'll be a slow, measured burn out or a fast, dramatic
one.

And besides, even people who "thrive in high pressure environments"
can burn out. Everybody has their breaking point with work. Even if
you went through four years of intense work, you might not make it
through eight.

I don't mean this to imply that you can't accomplish great things or
be super ambitious. But what's lost is that ambition is a marathon,
not a sprint. Great works are accomplished on the scale of decades,
not years.
