---
title:  "Look Up"
date:   2020-10-21 20:00:00 -0700
---

Talk to a student about the big tech companies and you'll often get an
enthusiastic response. They study for hours, practicing technical
interview questions. They beg their friends and acquantances and
strangers for referrals. They frequent various forums and beg for
resume feedback.

This post isn't for them. If you're one of these people, good for
you. Try to survive recruiting season and not have your job be your
identity.

Instead I'd like to talk to the people on the other side of the
spectrum. The people who are happy to take the first job they see. The
people who don't see the purpose of going above $30/hr.

I'll preface this with saying that there's nothing wrong with being
satisfied with one's job. If you truly are happy with your current
position, then feel free to ignore my advice here.

That being said, I believe there's some real benefits to working at a
larger, more prestigious company, even if it's only for a short
period. These benefits aren't always readily apparent unless you know
people at large tech companies or you work there yourself.

# Pay

This is the big elephant in the room. It's why most people aim for the
large companies. And yeah, pay can make a big difference. We all know
what money can accomplish. However this is probably the least
convincing point. Everybody knows Facebook pays bank. Granted, the
extent to which they pay a lot is often underrated. [Dan
Luu](https://danluu.com/startup-tradeoffs/) goes into this in detail,
but in short, it's a **lot** of cash.

But again, it's unlikely that cash is the convincing factor.
