It's funny. I've written all these posts and I kept on thinking I've
exhausted all the possible topics, yet I've never written a post on
how to do better in class.

How do you do better in a CS class? Well, if I were tasked with
helping a student, I'd ask these questions:

*Are you actually doing badly?*

Grades are harder to compute than you'd expect. Classes can be curved
a lot; professors aren't consistent and students can be overly hard on
themselves.

Do the math on your grade. Compute your total grade according to the
rubric. Figure out how much work is left in the semester. Schedule
some time and discuss with your professor how you're doing. Speaking
of...

*Have you talked to your professor?*

Your professor is the ultimate guide on your course performance. Talk
to them about how you're doing. If you're not doing well, work with
them to get on the right track. Don't try to swindle, beg or cajole
them into giving you better grades. Just talk to them and figure out
what needs to be done.

*Have you talked to other students?*

Other students can be super helpful. You can gauge your approximate
standing in the course and gain some potential study partners. Beware
of outwardly cocky students though. Just because someone appears to be
doing well doesn't mean they actually are.

*Are you studying with other students?*

Working with other people can be helpful in that you can learn what
you don't know. For me, a mixture of collaborative and solo studying
works well. I study with other, smarter people, figure out the gaps in
my knowledge, then fill them in on my own. Make sure that you're
studying with people who are above or at your level and productive.

*Do you understand what's going on? How much?*

If you're completely lost, you'll need a lot more guidance. Schedule
some meetings with your professor, follow the above advice on
collaborative studying.

If you're following the work but just not doing well, you might be
able to fix this with some tweaks to your studying routine. You should
still consider the above ideas of course.

Be honest with yourself. It doesn't help to delude yourself on how
much you understand. If you're not following, you're not following.

*Have you been attending the lectures?*

Surprise surprise, lectures are important. For those of you who may
not be familiar, lectures are the real-life, interactive versions of
those YouTube videos you speed through at 2x speed and pretend to
understand.

Lectures are great because you learn both the subject and your
professor's approach to the subject. This is important because
assessments are usually a combination of these two. A professor will
emphasize certain areas and these will likely show up on the test.

Pay attention during the lectures. I've definitely attended lectures
where my eyes glazed over. Taking notes can help you stay engaged.

*How much time are you devoting to this class?*

Interestingly enough, there's two bad answers to this question: too
little and too much. Too little time is an obvious one. You need to
spend a requisite amount of time to learn a topic. If you're not
studying or doing homework, you're not learning.

However too much time is equally bad. If someone tells me that they're
studying for 8 hours a day, every day, I'm gonna assume they're either
procrastinating a lot or studying extremely inefficiently. No class
should require 8 hours of studying per day. Take breaks, do fun stuff
and figure out a way to study efficiently.

The time distribution is also important. If you're devoting 10 hours a
week, but these 10 hours are all on the day before the problem set is
due, then you're not using your time effectively. Lots of courses work
better if you distribute the work throughout the week. You can think
about problem sets for a few days. You can use spaced repetition for
your foreign language vocab.

*Is this a professor issue?*

Again, be honest. Most people who do badly in courses will blame the
professor. Sometimes they're correct. Other times they're looking for
somebody to blame.

If your professor is truly to blame, keep following the above
advice. However you're gonna need to put in extra work. Start figuring
out ways to teach yourself the material. Such as...

*Do you have a copy of the textbook and have you looked at it?*

I highly advocate getting international editions of textbooks. They're
pretty easy to find for CS textbooks and way cheaper. A physical copy
is great because you can flip through it and not get distracted by
Facebook or Reddit.

A lot of CS textbooks are quite good actually. Most NYU courses use
fairly standard books like
[CLRS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Introduction_to_Algorithms) for
algorithms or [OSTEP](http://pages.cs.wisc.edu/~remzi/OSTEP/) for
operating systems. I'd recommend at least skimming them.

*What other sources have you used?*

There's so much programming/CS material on the internet. I've learned
a lot about various areas just from random StackOverflow questions,
various talks online and blog posts. They're designed for your average
programmer to digest, so they're usually quite accessible and less
academic.

*Have you been to tutoring/office hours?*

Having someone help you is so much better than working on your own. I
know, you were a straight-A student in high school. Suck it up and go
to tutoring. Everybody needs a little help now and then.

*Have you considered pre-studying?*

I learned early on in my CS career that if you take a peek at next
week's material, you can appear like a genius when the professor
covers it. Even if you don't fully understand it, that small peek can
help you significantly the second time around. After all, [some things
need to be learned
twice](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/08/05/hit-retry.html).

*Is there prerequisite or prior knowledge that you're lacking?*

This is super common. Maybe you weren't there on the day when they
covered basic Terminal commands. Maybe your professor didn't teach
it. Maybe you didn't learn it the first time around. Whatever it is,
don't be ashamed. Just go to tutoring/office hours/ask a friend and
get help! It'll make your life a lot easier.

*Is there anything other than school affecting your performance?*

This is the ultimate one. And look---right now we're all being affected
by a lot of things that are not school. It's totally understandable if
you're not performing at your best.

Sit down with your professor or with a therapist and discuss anything
that might be going on in your life. The course and your grades are
ultimately secondary to your mental and physical wellbeing.

Also, this doesn't have to be something major. Diet, exercise,
allergies, etc. can all play a big role in your grades. Take care of
them.

# Tough Versus Terminal

If you're reading this because you're struggling with a course, know
that you can and will survive. With some coordination with the
professor, hard work and perhaps a little bit of generosity, you'll do
just fine in the course.

However, if you find yourself reading this list a little too often, or
you find yourself deeply relating to the parts about procrastination,
perhaps you should analyze whether [you truly like
CS](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/05/14/do-you-like-it.html).

It's totally normal to have a couple courses that are a struggle. It's
less normal for most courses to be a struggle. If you're truly going
through this for the majority of your classes, you might not want to
be a CS major.


