---
title:  "The Case Against Double Majors"
date:   2020-05-15 20:00:00 -0700
---

Maybe you came into NYU with some AP credit. Maybe you're a little
advanced in some area. Maybe you just pride yourself in being
interdisciplinary. Whatever it is, you've decided to do a double
major. Whether it's the ultra-common CS/Math, Math/Econ, CS/DS, or
perhaps something a little more out there, double majors are
incredibly popular.

Indeed I'm a computer science/math major. And with that weighty wisdom
that comes from traveling through both lands, I come with this
hallowed advice:

Don't do it

# Do You *Really* Like Both?

A common theme I've noticed with double majors is that one major is
the student's primary major and the second one is more a glorified
minor. A lot of CS/Math majors take on the math major because they
notice that they can complete the CS one in a pretty short amount of
time. Math is pretty close to computer science, and besides, it seems
like a challenge, so why not?

Even if math is close to CS, that doesn't mean you'll like
it. There's a pretty large gap between Analysis and Operating
Systems. I've explained in other posts that you shouldn't do CS just
because you like math. The converse is also true.

My guess is that people assume technical is technical. Like if you're
a good programmer, you can automatically be a good mathematician. And
maybe? You'll probably be a better mathematician than an Art History
major. But what ultimately determines your abilities in math is
whether or not you like it.

By all means, if you're curious about learning more math, you should
take more math classes. But don't lock yourself into a double major
because you might finish your primary major too soon.

# Academic Participation Trophy

I talked about academic participation trophies with masters degrees;
Some people seem to pursue more degrees out of an abstract need to get
more accolades.

Maybe they think it'll look good on a resume. Sure, but not any more
than spending that extra time taking grad courses or doing
extracurriculars.

Maybe they don't know what to do after their major. A lot of people go
into college without an idea of what they're gonna do after. Which is
fine! Part of college is figuring that out. But getting a double major
isn't the answer.

# Looking Smart

I get it, a double major sounds really cool. When you have your
Wikipedia page describing you as a billionaire tech genius
philanthropist, you want it to say you double or triple majored while
writing 5 academic papers a year and saving wildlife in Australia.

But in reality it kinda just means you jumped through two sets of
hoops. You don't need the actual stamp of a double major to
demonstrate your brilliance and interdisciplinary skills.

Let's face it. Who actually remembers what Elon Musk majored in?

# Backup Plan

Some people do a double major because they or their parents are
worried about the feasibility of their other major. And...that's not
always a bad idea. College is an expensive investment and there are
risky majors. But as I've cautioned before, a half-assed major is a
lot worse than earnest extracurriculars. If you took a few basic CS
courses, started learning on your own and talked your way into a low
level internship, then you'd be in a significantly better position
then lackadaisically fulfilling a CS major.

Networking, internships and projects are the ultimate way to get job
opportunities. If you're in a major where you're worried about your
job prospects, a double major can certainly help you, but it won't get
you all the way.

# Major Major Major Major

You might be reading this and saying "screw you, I *do* like both of
my subjects!" Great! You still don't have to double major. Majors
often have really annoying requirements. You need to take a bunch of
dumb classes like intro courses, lab sections, maybe a few more
electives than you actually find interesting, etc. Suddenly your nice
open schedule becomes a twisted knapsack problem where you're trying
to pack more courses than necessary while not overloading credits or
your sanity.

I've seen this first hand. What ends up happening is that you spend
more time fulfilling requirements versus actually studying what you
want. I know that it took me until this semester to realize that no, I
didn't want to take Honors Analysis II. I had spent all this time
trying to fit these requirements in when I should have just focused on
doing what I liked.

What's especially bad about double majors with a primary and a
secondary major is that the secondary major tends to be harder for
you, as you have less of a focus/interest in it. This means you end up
spending more time on it. Eventually this secondary major is taking up
60-70 percent of your time and for what? A little ego boost and an
extra few words on your degree? Not worth it.

If you genuinely have multiple interests, take courses that interest
you and if you serendipitously end up with two majors, great!
Otherwise don't sweat it.

# No Depth

An inevitable issue with double majors is the same inevitable issue
with multitasking (or concurrency if you're nerdy). You end up doing
both tasks worse. You won't be able to really delve into a subject if
you have two sets of requirements to fulfill. Delving in this case
could mean taking graduate classes, or independent studies or reading
on your own.

I have friends who plan on going to grad school for one of their
majors, but ended up spending way too much time working on their other
major. Not worth it.

# No Breadth

Of course depth isn't always the goal. But double majors don't give
you much breadth either. Oh sure you get to explore two subjects. But
you don't get to participate in one of the great experiences of
college: taking random classes. If you're playing your twisted
knapsack scheduling game, you can't randomly decide to take a drawing
class. You can't decide to try out a cinema studies course. You can't
really explore.

# Do It or Don't

A lot of people who do double majors decide this before they've
stepped into college. They come in as freshmen, proudly proclaiming
they're a Math/CS major. I know I did.

They start taking classes and maybe they don't like every class but
they tell themselves that they're going to stick to their
ambitions. And besides it'll probably get better. I know I did.

There's definitely people who have benefited from double majors. But
it's a lot fewer than you'd expect. If you're interested in two
subjects, take some courses, do your best and then decide.
