I've hesitated to write this post. Not because it'd be controversial
or because it'd get me in trouble. But because I'm concerned that
people might misconstrue or exaggerate the message.

Let me be unambiguous here:

### You should keep learning all aspects of computer science

### You shouldn't feel obligated to stick to a particular area

### There is no one magical area that will get you hired. No, not even ML.

With that out of the way, let's get on with the post.

I'm interested in programming languages and compilers. I find them
really fascinating for a variety of reasons. They're a foundational
aspect of programming; they influence how people think about their
problems; and they have a host of cool engineering challenges.

I got interested in programming languages in my freshman year of
college. I stumbled upon [Crafting
Interpreters](https://craftinginterpreters.com/), started coding along
and got hooked. Since then I've attended [workshops on programming
languages](https://school.racket-lang.org/), tried to work on the Ruby
interpreter, (slowly) built my own compiler and finally got a job
working on a compiler. In short, I found a niche.

Niches can be really great. I've gotten good at an area, moreso than
your average undergrad. I've managed to connect with people in my
field and learn from them. And the benefit you've all been waiting
for, I've managed to get jobs out of it.

You see, it becomes a lot easier to sell yourself when you can
confidently say that you are in the few hundred or so who know this
area. I have debugged WebAssembly bytecode. I understand how to
generate closures.

Of course, this may seem like saying "if you're a top tier basketball
player, you won't have trouble getting recruited". But I promise you
that I'm not some brilliant coder. The truth is, the more niche you
go, the less competition you have. It's less like basketball and more
like practicing a single move.

I'll give an example. I worked on a compiler for my language, Saber,
for a while. It's still not fully working but I managed to get a few
core concepts done like strings, structs, closures, etc. I sent an
email to the Cloudflare CEO explaining that I had written this
compiler and that I was interested in working at Cloudflare due to
their work on WebAssembly and Rust. To my surprise, he responded! And
I got the job!

This may seem extraordinary, but it's actually not. For one, CEOs
respond to their email a lot more than you'd expect. I'm 2/3 for
emailing billion dollar company CEOs (1/1 for trillion :D). And
remember, this is a niche. There's only a few hundred[^1] people who
have experience with WebAssembly and writing compilers and writing
Rust. The majority of them are already in these positions. You could
train a regular intern for this, but that'd likely take a few months
between learning Rust, WebAssembly and compiler techniques.

[^1]: Generously. I'd estimate anywhere from 100-300

